[Amit Varma]: There is a story I have told a couple of times on this show, and while it's a true story,
[Amit Varma]: it's not the full story. There is another side to it. Let me tell you that story again.
[Amit Varma]: A few years ago, I was hanging with a friend who worked closely with Narendra Modi in the
[Amit Varma]: auties. She has fallen out with him since, but for a period of time when Modi was the
[Amit Varma]: Chief Minister, she was his friend. And she told me that one day, in his residence, some
[Amit Varma]: of them were hanging with him, maybe six or seven people, and Modi told them a story.
[Amit Varma]: He said that one day when he was a kid, his mother fell ill. At one point, she felt hot
[Amit Varma]: and wanted the fan on. The young Narendra went to switch on the fan, and then realized
[Amit Varma]: that there was no electricity. And he couldn't even do this for his mother. When he reached
[Amit Varma]: this point of the story, Modi started crying. My friend's point was that this is how he
[Amit Varma]: understands the world, through experience. He's an experiential Prime Minister, or as
[Amit Varma]: I wrote in a column later, an aankho dekhi Prime Minister. He has experienced the importance
[Amit Varma]: of electricity, so when he becomes CM of Gujarat, he makes it his mission to electrify as many
[Amit Varma]: villages as he can. Similarly, he has walked on roads, and he can see their importance,
[Amit Varma]: and so on. And my friend who told me this story felt, and I agreed, that this approach
[Amit Varma]: has its limitations. There are some things you can experience and understand, and there
[Amit Varma]: are others that you can't. They may be outside your experience, or they may be frameworks,
[Amit Varma]: ways of looking at the world, which affect real people and remain unseen. Like spontaneous
[Amit Varma]: order, for example, or the power of voluntary exchange, or the countless oppressions of
[Amit Varma]: the state that we have normalized. This is why Modi as Prime Minister made huge blunders
[Amit Varma]: like demonetization. There was no way he could have understood the working of the economy
[Amit Varma]: from direct experience. And he had never learned the mental frameworks that would help him
[Amit Varma]: make sense of this. Now in the column I wrote about this, which I'll link from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes, I made this an argument for reading. How can we learn those things about the world
[Amit Varma]: which direct experience may not teach us? We do it through reading. The lives of others,
[Amit Varma]: the thoughts of others, all of human knowledge is available to us. And while one can't blame
[Amit Varma]: Modi for not being much of a reader, as he didn't have that sort of privileged upbringing,
[Amit Varma]: he should have realized his limitation, remained humble about the extent of his knowledge,
[Amit Varma]: and read more, listened to experts more, instead of pushing them away. Now this story, this
[Amit Varma]: narrative, while it is the truth, is not the whole truth. There is an opposite problem
[Amit Varma]: also. That opposite problem is this. You may have all the intellectual knowledge in the
[Amit Varma]: world, theories about public policy, notions of how to make the world better, and you may
[Amit Varma]: imprison yourself in an ivory tower because you feel you know it all, and you don't need
[Amit Varma]: to interact with reality because hey, you get it. This is also a mistake, and it leads
[Amit Varma]: to a top-down way of thinking. In fact, if you consider Jawaharlal Nehru and Narendra
[Amit Varma]: Modi, they both came to the fatal conceit of top-down central planning, but they came
[Amit Varma]: to it from different roads. Nehru's intellectual arrogance, and I had a recent episode on this
[Amit Varma]: I urge you to listen to with Rupert Dhaman Singh and Adil Hussain, which I linked from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes, Nehru's intellectual arrogance led him to believe that he had figured out
[Amit Varma]: deep truths about the economy and society, and he could engineer both from the top-down.
[Amit Varma]: He was wrong, and he failed. Modi thinks that what he has learned from his experience of
[Amit Varma]: the world is all that needs to be learned, and now he must guide others from the top-down,
[Amit Varma]: like a wise sage. He is also wrong, and he has also failed. And the big lesson in this
[Amit Varma]: is something that my guest today figured out through years of being both an intellectual
[Amit Varma]: and a grassroots activist, that a true understanding of the world can only come in a bottom-up
[Amit Varma]: way. The world is complex, there is always more to it than you think you understand.
[Amit Varma]: We cannot stop searching for the truth, and the truth lies out there, not in here.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is a man I adore, a dear friend, a wise
[Amit Varma]: guide, a man I call Dadamoni. Barun Mitra is that rare creature who is both a man of
[Amit Varma]: ideas and a man of action. He was a prolific participant in the marketplace of ideas from
[Amit Varma]: the 1990s, writing powerful, counter-intuitive and thought-provoking pieces. He also founded
[Amit Varma]: a classical liberal think-tank, or a libertarian think-tank, called the Liberty Institute.
[Amit Varma]: He was also always a grassroots worker. He threw himself into various farmer's movements,
[Amit Varma]: supporting a mass agitation led by the great Sharad Joshi that led to actual policy change
[Amit Varma]: around two decades ago. He also participated in a remarkable movement to get property rights
[Amit Varma]: for tribals, in which modern technology played a part in solving an ancient problem. We'll
[Amit Varma]: discuss both of these in our conversation, the highlight of which is when he shares how
[Amit Varma]: in his journey, he realised that for his ideas to mean anything, they have to be informed
[Amit Varma]: by ground realities. His idol, and someone we discuss here, is Mahatma Gandhi, who made
[Amit Varma]: our freedom movement into a mass movement, by taking his ideas to the people, by putting
[Amit Varma]: them first. Barun says, a key moment in his way of thinking about the world, was when
[Amit Varma]: he realised that the important word in the phrase public policy, is not policy, but public.
[Amit Varma]: You have to go past the abstract and look at the concrete. I have always admired Barun
[Amit Varma]: for his clarity and depth of engagement, and when I double clicked on those, I realised
[Amit Varma]: where they came from. His clarity comes from his curiosity. He always tests his ideas and
[Amit Varma]: he's open to challenge. His engagement comes from his genuine empathy. Over the years I've
[Amit Varma]: learnt a lot from Barun, and I could go on and on talking about this, but why don't you
[Amit Varma]: listen to this conversation instead, which by the way, we had in November, that's when
[Amit Varma]: I recorded this. Do listen, but before that, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs Rs. 10,000 plus GST,
[Amit Varma]: or about $150, and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register
[Amit Varma]: at indiauncut.com slash clear writing. That's indiauncut.com slash clear writing. Being
[Amit Varma]: a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear
[Amit Varma]: idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Barun, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amit. I'm still wondering why am I here, but thanks for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Firstly, you've been here before. Secondly, this is an episode I'm excited about because
[Amit Varma]: I'll just tell my listeners that when Barun just sat down, he was like, why are you calling
[Amit Varma]: me? I have no accomplishments. I haven't written books. And it's true, he hasn't written books,
[Amit Varma]: so he should. But my whole point was that one, accomplishments are something which is
[Amit Varma]: not up to us to judge. Barun, your social work is so immense that, you know, some of
[Amit Varma]: the value of it is perhaps incalculable. And also, you know, one of my friends once described
[Amit Varma]: himself as a person who collects interesting people. And I think in a manner of speaking
[Amit Varma]: through the show, I have conversations which make me think and therefore by extension also
[Amit Varma]: make listeners hopefully think. And the other thing that I have realized is that when I
[Amit Varma]: speak with people I already know as friends, like we've known each other for 15-20 years,
[Amit Varma]: like you just mentioned, I find that after the conversation, I realized I hadn't known
[Amit Varma]: them at all, because we talk about so much else. So that's kind of what we do. Like,
[Amit Varma]: since I have known you, you have basically been father time with your flowing white beard
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. A 21st century libertarian Marx, as it were. So tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about sort of your childhood, where were you born? Where did you grow up? What were your
[Amit Varma]: early years like? Give me a sense of the texture of your life, because the texture of these
[Amit Varma]: modern times are so different, where we are surrounded by smartphones and sensory influences
[Amit Varma]: and networks and all of that, but it wasn't like that when you were growing up.
[Guest]: Yeah, it wasn't like that. And, you know, I'm kind of split on history or the past,
[Guest]: mine or otherwise, because, you know, we seem to invariably draw kind of very destructive
[Guest]: lessons from history. I rarely look back as such, except to figure out how is it going
[Guest]: to shape or influence what I'm going to do next. So I rarely, I mean, I rarely look back
[Guest]: in any particular meaningful sense. But, and I grew up in a, you know, compared to you,
[Guest]: I grew up probably 10-20 years before you. I think you've just passed 60 and I'm 47.
[Guest]: I'm probably heading towards 61. Why probably? You might be father time, but you haven't
[Guest]: stopped time. I was born in Calcutta and a very different Calcutta, a city that's still
[Guest]: my home. And that actually also shows every time I go back to Alcatraz, it kind of a benchmark
[Guest]: for me to where we are and where we were. I mean, personally, socially, city, collectively,
[Guest]: community wise. Yeah, it's a sea change. And I studied in a Bengali school. So that was
[Guest]: one of my first kind of throwback. My primary education was in a Bengali medium, you know,
[Guest]: like a local school, like most of us in those days. And then the Naxalite movement happened
[Guest]: in the late 60s. And my father had been in politics since his youth days. He was a member
[Guest]: of the Congress and a manager of the local, election manager for the local MLA, MP. So
[Guest]: it was a challenging time for him and for us and the schools, etc, were to shut. So
[Guest]: my father shifted me to my uncle, who was then in Madhya Pradesh. And so my first shock
[Guest]: was for all of them and me was, I had no knowledge of English, nor Hindi. You know, English,
[Guest]: I could read alphabets, but nothing more than that. And Hindi, I had no knowledge. And you
[Guest]: were like 9 or 10. Yeah, probably. And so that was a shock and what kind of amazed me
[Guest]: and what I still remember, I don't remember the name of the class teacher. But I do remember
[Guest]: the length to which she went to have me in the class and yet prepare me in a way for
[Guest]: which I needed to be prepared because I was far behind the class in virtually every subject.
[Guest]: And that to me was quite an interesting because I was different, yet I was made to feel, you
[Guest]: know, part of the same class. So that was, I mean, looking back was one of my nice pleasant
[Guest]: experience that she took so much trouble and that's how, I mean, English became my second
[Guest]: language as such. Otherwise, I probably wouldn't have. But then I came back to Calcutta for
[Guest]: my higher secondary and did my engineering. You know, in my days, from my kind of a family,
[Guest]: you either had to be a doctor or an engineer. Yeah, I mean, there was literally no option
[Guest]: and we just tried our luck that whichever we got and I got engineering. So I went for
[Guest]: engineering in the REC Suratkal. So that was another first, for instance, for my class
[Guest]: or my friends, I was probably the first one who was put on a flight and asked to go to
[Guest]: the college on his own and figure out everything of admission, which compared to what's happening
[Guest]: today and I see all around me is, you know, people don't believe. It was fun and the best
[Guest]: part was that that college five years that I spent my engineering was five years, those
[Guest]: days it was 11 plus 5. And I really enjoyed it. One because the experience itself outside
[Guest]: the outside home and alone and in a very cosmopolitan place because regional engineering colleges
[Guest]: were literally mini India. Yeah, I had no idea of South India when I landed there. So
[Guest]: to get used to everything, the food and people, the language and everything. But most importantly,
[Guest]: what I remember and what I really, you know, what's this my kind of second bright spot
[Guest]: was that that college was located on the beach, literally.
[Unknown]: Wow.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, there was a tiny village, but it was really tiny fisherman's village. Now
[Guest]: it's quite different because it's developed like most places. But we could virtually,
[Guest]: in fact, our kind of preference as we climbed the ladder in the college was to find a room
[Guest]: from which we could see the sea, you know. So that was an incredible experience to have
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: And you didn't get a room where you could see the sea?
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah. Most of the time. Because you go on the higher floor, second or third or
[Guest]: fourth floor, you'll see the sea. The sea was just there. So, and the breeze, you could
[Guest]: always smell the sea. So that was really the most memorable college experience because
[Guest]: I was a mediocre student. I mean, like we all had to finish and we had to look for,
[Guest]: you know, all the public sector exams for jobs, etc, etc. Yeah, so that was, but I do
[Guest]: my, my, I mean, apart from the location, the thing I think I learned, perhaps the only
[Guest]: thing I learned or I still remember and use perhaps is, you know, engineering is about
[Guest]: solving problems. I try to look at what's the problem, how to break it down, how to
[Guest]: figure out the steps to go around it. And that, to me, I think has been the real education
[Guest]: that I think I'm very pleased or very grateful about, that I didn't know it'll turn out
[Guest]: this way. But that's something I've used perhaps right through, I mean, for the last
[Guest]: 30, 30 plus years, yeah. So that I think has been, so I'm still carrying that sense all
[Guest]: the time in my mind, that I can perhaps look at things somewhat differently and figure
[Guest]: out how to go around it and gives me, and that's my only satisfaction, that if I can
[Guest]: find out something that I had not thought before, that I had not come across before
[Guest]: and get a handle on it. To me, there's nothing more satisfying than that. So it's, yeah,
[Guest]: it's a completely personal, personal trip. So, which is why, you know, there's no book
[Guest]: to showcase.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, as you were speaking of your school in Madhya Pradesh, the thought struck
[Amit Varma]: me that in a sense, and I'll explain what I mean by that, in a sense, we're all born
[Amit Varma]: blind in the sense that we don't really have a way of seeing the world when we are
[Amit Varma]: kids. And when we begin to see the world, we are blind to a lot of things because we
[Amit Varma]: haven't kind of experienced them. Like it strikes me that you're not knowing English
[Amit Varma]: or Hindi, and the teachers spending that time with you, being compassionate, reaching out
[Amit Varma]: to you, empathizing, understanding, you know, for, she must have had that extra layer of
[Amit Varma]: empathy for someone who is not one of her kids in the sense, not from there. And equally
[Amit Varma]: for you, at some level, it must have also made you more aware in your later life, wherever
[Amit Varma]: that there are people around you who may not see things the same way, who may be unfortunate
[Amit Varma]: in different ways, and they don't need to be condemned or cast aside, but helped and
[Amit Varma]: all that. And, you know, one of your qualities as our mutual friend, Mohit and I were discussing
[Amit Varma]: last night is your incredible compassion for people you don't even know. And for all the
[Amit Varma]: other kids, it might not have been like that. They may have completely ignored you and not
[Amit Varma]: given a shit because they haven't had that experience. Like I look at myself growing
[Amit Varma]: up also in a cocoon of privilege, and I was blind to a lot of things and you grow older
[Amit Varma]: and experience a world and more and more layers kind of fall off. And I'm just thinking aloud
[Amit Varma]: here. But how much do you think there is something to that in the sense that people can be innately
[Amit Varma]: compassionate and empathetic, I mean, to lesser or greater extents, or experiences can play
[Amit Varma]: a big part in them seeing the world a little differently or making an effort to see the
[Amit Varma]: world a little differently in this way. And the reason I ask this is that too often, through
[Amit Varma]: our lives, as thinkers, as people wrestling with ideologies or ways of looking at the
[Amit Varma]: world, too often, I think me and many other people I know, have made the mistake of thinking
[Amit Varma]: at of everything at an intellectual level. And one of the things that I am still learning
[Amit Varma]: from you is that don't think about ideas, think about people, everything is really about
[Amit Varma]: people and reaching out and connecting, which you are so good at doing. So bit of a ramble,
[Amit Varma]: but what are your sort of thoughts on this?
[Guest]: It's interesting you put it that way. I probably wouldn't or probably that wasn't my kind
[Guest]: of direct experience. Well, you know, I am grateful to everything that has happened in
[Guest]: the past and most of which I had no control. But I think, you know, for instance, after
[Guest]: my initial first 20 years, since I thought, and that was one of my reasons to explore
[Guest]: public policy, was that I'd look into things that I am interested in, that I had not done
[Guest]: before. And to me, that was my biggest kind of stimulus that you can venture into any
[Guest]: issue because as a citizen, as a member of the public, you must have a handle to it.
[Guest]: And which I realized very late, although I experienced it for since about 2000 on. But
[Guest]: I realized it only in the last five years, perhaps, that we forget the public part of
[Guest]: the policy.
[Guest]: Public policy, when you're saying before the policy, consider the public.
[Guest]: We forget the prefix, you know, it's always there. It's always, you know, the phrase is
[Guest]: public policy, but we forget the public and we focus on the policy and we think, you know,
[Guest]: we are doing the best job we can, we are preparing the most rational, most contextual policy
[Guest]: we can think of, and the public will just lap it, accept it, because after all, what's
[Guest]: the public?
[Guest]: I think that has been one of, I mean, as of now, I'm sure it may change as I go along.
[Guest]: As of now, that has been kind of my realization, which was a conscious realization because,
[Guest]: I mean, whatever is innate or whatever was seen normal, I wouldn't be aware of it as
[Guest]: such.
[Guest]: But last five, six years, I've become really aware that where we went wrong.
[Guest]: And I think, and I mean, not just me, but I think what you just said a little earlier,
[Guest]: that the intellectual discourse has a tendency to create a sense of knowledge and an imperceptible
[Guest]: sense of arrogance, which I have tried, at least consciously, tried to break down and
[Guest]: challenge myself, at least in the last five, six years.
[Guest]: Every time I kind of felt that, you know, I think I know.
[Guest]: So the moment I feel that I think I know something, I try to push to see, is there all to it or
[Guest]: is there a way to look beyond?
[Guest]: And I think that is, I think has been a real realization that why we made the mistake and
[Guest]: which is what I've been very provocative, even before that, when I was kind of grappling
[Guest]: with this, that, you know, among the kind of circles I was in, education and awareness
[Guest]: was a big thing, that we need to make people aware, make people, educate people.
[Guest]: And to me, that itself carries in it the seed of arrogance and therefore the blindness to
[Guest]: people because a teacher is supposed to know and communicate that and make the student
[Guest]: who is kind of innocent or ignorant aware of the so-called issues.
[Guest]: But that I think is only half the story.
[Guest]: If the teacher can't relate to the student or if the teacher can't place the issue in
[Guest]: the context or through the lens through which the student might be seeing it, no amount
[Guest]: of education and awareness is going to help.
[Guest]: So all this came to me much later because I began to kind of ask at many meetings that
[Guest]: what are we teaching?
[Guest]: To whom are we teaching?
[Guest]: Is it because we know or is it because every opportunity is an occasion for us to know
[Guest]: a little bit more?
[Guest]: You know, that puts me in a kind of a jeopardy because I tend to always think on my feet.
[Guest]: I like that and therefore even when I prepare a text, I deviate because if I prepared it,
[Guest]: I know it.
[Guest]: You know, I need to push no matter what I am trying and that comes with its risk because
[Guest]: I may not know where I am headed.
[Guest]: But to me the satisfaction is that at the end if I make a mistake, I hope I try to recognize
[Guest]: it so that I can rectify it and take that one more step.
[Guest]: And if I think I put the thing in a way that satisfied me, then perhaps I have a base to
[Guest]: build further.
[Guest]: So I look at it as a win-win, you know, no matter what happens and which to me actually
[Guest]: has kind of helped I believe that currently or last few years, I actually try to go out
[Guest]: and engage with not just people I didn't know but engage with people or try to reach
[Guest]: out to people with whom I might actually have a disagreement and figure out how do I learn
[Guest]: to communicate, to have a meaningful discussion, dialogue with people with whom both of us
[Guest]: may know that we disagree on some things and disagreements can be quite fundamental in
[Guest]: terms of ideology or intellectual perspectives but yet have a conversation which is another
[Guest]: way of saying that that's another way for me to push myself.
[Guest]: But how do I and in today's context it becomes even much more relevant because 10-15 years
[Guest]: ago there was no eco-chamber to speak of as such, you know.
[Guest]: So today's context, I mean to me there can't be anything much more fundamental than figuring
[Guest]: out how do we break out from our own cocoons, own, you know, safe zones and really have
[Guest]: some exciting things to do, to learn, to push, yeah.
[Guest]: So that I think which is probably why I'm interested in people because it always puts
[Guest]: me in a new situation because everybody is different, you know, everybody is looking
[Guest]: at the world through a different lens than mine even those who may agree with me on very
[Guest]: many things.
[Guest]: So I think that's quite an exciting way of taking the next step, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So yesterday I recorded an episode with Abhinandan Sekri, the News Laundry founder that'll probably
[Amit Varma]: come out a few weeks before this one and in that he said something very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: He spoke about how while shooting for a television show he was going through the Northeast and
[Amit Varma]: in the Northeast when they were in these different villages, they asked the people that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, if the government is to spend money on you or if you have money to spend, what
[Amit Varma]: would you spend it on?
[Amit Varma]: And the answers he said that we were expecting in all our arrogance, we thought they will
[Amit Varma]: say roads or infrastructure or bridges or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And they said, make a cinema theater or make a dance hall.
[Amit Varma]: And he said his initial reaction was one of a sort of a patronizing looking down on these
[Amit Varma]: people that don't they understand their greater good?
[Amit Varma]: Why do they want a cinema hall?
[Amit Varma]: But then when he spoke to them deeper, he realized that what was behind it was as a
[Amit Varma]: young people were growing up, they wanted to see movies because there was nothing in
[Amit Varma]: their own village or town where they could see movies.
[Amit Varma]: They would go to other cities like whatever, Imphal, Shillong, whatever is the nearest
[Amit Varma]: big city.
[Amit Varma]: And the roads were so bad that an accident rates were so high.
[Amit Varma]: The death rate was pretty high just going to watch a film.
[Amit Varma]: What if the cinema theater was in the village itself?
[Amit Varma]: Now, this is something no central planner from a distance can foresee.
[Amit Varma]: So if you go with the arrogance of a public policy person and you say externalities, roads
[Amit Varma]: or from another point of view, you might say then they will vote for us if we build a temple
[Amit Varma]: for the gods.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, locally, what people may want individuals in a community they want is completely
[Amit Varma]: different.
[Amit Varma]: And as you were saying that it just reminded me of the wiseness of that, that even though
[Amit Varma]: you're an engineer, you thankfully don't have what we derisively call the engineering mindset,
[Amit Varma]: which is that thing that you can design a society or you can design an intervention
[Amit Varma]: in particular ways, assuming that people are a static thing, but people are not a static
[Amit Varma]: thing.
[Amit Varma]: Their needs and desires are very local, very specific and inaccessible to outsiders.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me something, this realization of yours, which I'm beginning to think about
[Amit Varma]: seriously and realizing myself and just by talking to you learning from that must have
[Amit Varma]: happened over a period of many years.
[Amit Varma]: So can you, for example, think of mistakes in your thinking, assumptions you made at
[Amit Varma]: some point, perhaps, which got corrected when you actually, you know, met with people like
[Amit Varma]: moments where you thought, oh, my thinking was arrogant and wrong and simplistic.
[Amit Varma]: And now I know better because I made the effort to kind of reach out.
[Amit Varma]: So can you give me like instances of that so I can understand how the process went?
[Guest]: Yeah, it was like you said, it was long drawn.
[Guest]: I mean, obviously, there was no kind of a sunrise moment that it happens.
[Guest]: I mean, primarily it was that when we started or when I started in the late 80s, early 90s,
[Guest]: India was liberalizing and we didn't know where we will head.
[Guest]: But by that time, I had kind of a clearer idea where I would like to head.
[Guest]: And therefore, public policy greatly interested me in the hope that it will shape the tomorrow
[Guest]: or the future.
[Guest]: So in that early 90s, the issue primarily as I see it now was, how do I win the debate?
[Guest]: You know, how do I score the points that I want to score so that the other side is kind
[Guest]: of beaten back?
[Guest]: Over the next 10-15 years, I realized that that is one of the fundamental flaws.
[Guest]: It's not about defeating the other side.
[Guest]: It's about winning over the other side.
[Guest]: You know, so to me, that became, I mean, again, this realization didn't happen overnight.
[Guest]: But as I see it, it began to happen about 10-15 years since I began.
[Guest]: And one critical point, which I again, which I didn't realize, which happened 20 years
[Guest]: ago, but I actually didn't realize its significance since I'm looking back now.
[Guest]: It was in 2000 and when I was really active, I mean, you know, I mean, the climate change
[Guest]: or the WTO or whatever, where a liberal angle could be placed and where I could be as provocative,
[Guest]: I would be as provocative.
[Guest]: I mean, for the sake of scoring that point.
[Guest]: So I wrote and spoke on things which would be outlandish even today.
[Guest]: But in 2000, I happened to come across a movement that Sharad Joshi was leading at that time.
[Guest]: I mean, Sharad Joshi is the farmer's leader who passed away a few years ago.
[Guest]: I met him in the early 90s, so I knew him.
[Guest]: But we knew each other intellectually that we had a liberal orientation, etc.
[Guest]: But in 2000, I came across his first, and that was also mine, a first direct experience
[Guest]: exposure even to a limited extent of a mass movement, because I did grow up during the
[Guest]: anti-emergency when I just went to college.
[Guest]: And I still remember the blank pages of newspapers that came on the day emergency came, when
[Guest]: I was just completing my class 11.
[Guest]: And therefore, I had seen that era of public enthusiasm for change, etc., etc.
[Guest]: But it was in this one, in 2000, that I began to see and actually experienced it, because
[Guest]: proof of the pudding is in eating, that Sharad Joshi's ability to connect with the people
[Guest]: beyond the intellectual dimension actually made people aspire or get inspired to strive
[Guest]: for things which otherwise they may not have, or it may have happened much later.
[Guest]: And secondly, once the people connected, the policy followed.
[Guest]: So that was my first direct experience on a movement that was built on the first generation
[Guest]: genetically modified cotton, which the cotton farmers in Western India, particularly Gujarat-Maharashtra
[Guest]: and some other parts wanted.
[Guest]: They were already growing the unauthorized, unapproved varieties, which is how the world
[Guest]: came to know that Indian farmers were already growing something that hadn't been approved
[Guest]: or authorized by the state.
[Guest]: And Sharad Joshi sought to leverage that.
[Guest]: And in 2002, in a matter of a month, the government changed its policy.
[Guest]: To me, that was, you know, I was more an observer, but a close observer since I knew him and
[Guest]: had been to some of the things, and because it was new to me, because I had never interacted
[Guest]: with public in my adult life as much as then.
[Guest]: So it was kind of an eye-opener that the policy could change if we can build the political
[Guest]: capital, and the political capital can only come if we can take the people or significant
[Guest]: number of people with us, something which I had not experienced nor thought of then.
[Guest]: And again, I didn't realize the full significance till over quite a few years, a decade or more.
[Guest]: But to me, that was one direct personal experience that I can think of, which turned me from
[Guest]: the policy to public policy, yeah.
[Guest]: So for that, and Sharad Joshi not being primarily an intellectual, although he was, given his
[Guest]: background, you know, extremely educated, accomplished person coming back to India to
[Guest]: look into agriculture from a family who had not been in agriculture for a few generations.
[Guest]: So he did it as a practitioner, you know, so he was not pursuing the issue primarily
[Guest]: on the intellectual plane, which to me is my kind of lesson that intellectual dimensions
[Guest]: are important, but they're not nearly the whole story.
[Guest]: It's the people and how do we reach out.
[Guest]: And to reach out, it becomes two ways, you know, like either you reach out patronizingly
[Guest]: or you reach out more as your equal.
[Guest]: You empathize with them in a way a human being ought to empathize with another person.
[Guest]: And which to me is amazing that five, six years after his death, in parts of Maharashtra,
[Guest]: I've been, people still give me or show me wedding cards for their daughters or sons,
[Guest]: not with pictures of gods, but with pictures of Sharad Joshi, which to me is something
[Guest]: amazing that people would hold someone, you know, who was merely an Rajya Sabha MP, you
[Guest]: know, I mean, I don't know to how long he'll be remembered as such beyond the people who
[Guest]: knew him.
[Guest]: But that this could happen.
[Guest]: And therefore, how did, how could this happen?
[Guest]: That how do you build the relationship where this level, this depth of bonding happens
[Guest]: and what a contrast it is with today, with social media and the rest, well, we are more
[Guest]: connected.
[Guest]: We have no connection.
[Guest]: Isn't it amazing?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I feel it really amazing.
[Amit Varma]: That's beautifully put, I'll just give some context to my listeners about Sharad Joshi
[Amit Varma]: and the specific movement you were, you know, you witnessed up close.
[Amit Varma]: Sharad Joshi was a great leader, bureaucrat, etc, etc, who essentially came back to India
[Amit Varma]: in the late 70s and said, I'll go back to farming and then realized as a farmer the
[Amit Varma]: problems that agriculturalists throughout the country faced.
[Amit Varma]: But unlike the other political rhetoric of the day, which saw the state as a solution
[Amit Varma]: to these problems, he realized that most of these problems had been created by the state
[Amit Varma]: and that these counterintuitive ideas had to be communicated to the people at large.
[Amit Varma]: And he managed to actually build a mass movement of farmers who were, in a sense, asking for
[Amit Varma]: the state to get out of the way.
[Amit Varma]: And I have a very good episode in Hindi, which kind of explains this with the leader.
[Amit Varma]: You introduced me to Varun Gunwan Patil.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you were present at the recording in the room when I recorded with Gunwan ji.
[Amit Varma]: So that's episode 86.
[Amit Varma]: I'll link it from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And I also wrote a column called A Tale of Two Satyagrahas.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them was the one that you speak of, that essentially, just to give context
[Amit Varma]: again, in the 1990s, as the 90s were coming to an end, cotton crops across India started
[Amit Varma]: failing because there were pests like bollworms that were ravaging these crops.
[Amit Varma]: And farmers had to use increasing amounts of pesticide to keep them at bay.
[Amit Varma]: And there was so much more labor involved, the cost of the pesticides were high.
[Amit Varma]: The crops would often fail anyway.
[Amit Varma]: It was just a downward spiral.
[Amit Varma]: Then technology.
[Amit Varma]: Farmers heard of something called BT cotton, which was a genetically modified kind of cotton.
[Amit Varma]: And it was being used across the world, completely safe.
[Amit Varma]: But because it's a new technology, Luddites everywhere were kind of protesting and they
[Amit Varma]: were illegal in India.
[Amit Varma]: So then what happened is farmers in Gujarat got hold of a bunch of these BT cotton seeds
[Amit Varma]: and they planted them.
[Amit Varma]: And what happened in 2002 was that all cotton crops in Gujarat failed, except the 10,000
[Amit Varma]: acres with BT cotton.
[Amit Varma]: You would imagine that there would be a lesson in this.
[Amit Varma]: But the lesson that the government took was not that these are the crops that survived,
[Amit Varma]: but that these are the crops which are illegal.
[Amit Varma]: So they wanted to burn these 10,000 hectares of cotton.
[Amit Varma]: And at this point, Sharad Joshi, who leads the Shetkari Sangatana in Maharashtra, took
[Amit Varma]: around 10,000 farmers with him to Gujarat to stand with their fellow farmers.
[Amit Varma]: And they basically just went into those fields and they said, you want to take the cotton
[Amit Varma]: over our dead bodies, come and do it.
[Amit Varma]: And like you said, the people's movement there was just too much.
[Amit Varma]: And the ban on BT cotton was lifted by the Vajpayee government, which is such an inspiring
[Amit Varma]: story at many levels.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I think I've seen a clip of you at a press conference of farmers in 1999 or something,
[Guest]: right?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, where, you know, a distant clip where you are also holding forth on this.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, I'll put a link to my column, which kind of talks about why, you know, GMO
[Amit Varma]: is great, fantastic, we should embrace it.
[Amit Varma]: Now, let's go a little further back in your journey that we've spoken of public policy,
[Amit Varma]: we've spoken of policy and we've spoken of public policy, as you said, but before this,
[Amit Varma]: you were a marine engineer and you sailed the world.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, post your engineering and all that.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about those sort of experiences like at that time when you were in college in RSC
[Amit Varma]: Suratkal doing engineering and so on.
[Amit Varma]: What did you want to be?
[Amit Varma]: What was your view of the world?
[Amit Varma]: And in ideological terms, how was your view of the world sort of developing?
[Amit Varma]: Because I remember, I didn't think the things I think today when I was 20 or even 25.
[Amit Varma]: It took a lot of time for me to gradually come around to my way of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And otherwise, it was very vague in college, I was just all over the place, no fixed ideas
[Amit Varma]: on anything, which is not surprising, because the received wisdom around you is so flawed
[Amit Varma]: in so many ways, with the religion of the state and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And also, you have so few books to read, though I was more privileged than most, but you have,
[Amit Varma]: you just don't have that kind of access and exposure.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a sense of your intellectual development through that early period and how the way
[Amit Varma]: you look at the world begins to change.
[Guest]: I mean, I grew up in, like I said, I grew up in a family which was very political.
[Guest]: From both sides, from my father's side and from my mother's side.
[Guest]: Although part of my, from my mother's side was on, in the left, quite actively involved
[Guest]: with left politics in Bengal, and my father's side and my maternal grandfather, they were
[Guest]: all deeply into Congress from, you know, almost the time they were born.
[Guest]: And my father continued in that vein.
[Guest]: So I grew up, so it was natural that, you know, I grew up in a family that would be
[Guest]: anti-CPM or left in Bengal and Congress.
[Guest]: But then I saw my father change during 77 or 76, I mean, emergency time.
[Guest]: And that was just the excitement, you know, like it was a David versus Goliath thing for
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: I mean, more than because I didn't really have a full grasp of emergency except the
[Guest]: blank spaces I saw in Statesman in Calcutta that, you know, the printed blank spaces because
[Guest]: of censorship.
[Guest]: So apart from that, I don't really have a direct, this thing except for occasional columns,
[Guest]: Minoo Masani or things that would interest me, that's something different, something
[Guest]: to think about, or something that made me think.
[Guest]: But I think what happened was or how it happened perhaps is the emergency and the turmoil and
[Guest]: the best part of that turmoil was perhaps that it happened in the physical space, you
[Guest]: know, having and seeing how the social media space or the digital space, the behavior takes
[Guest]: place.
[Guest]: I think my initial experience were all in the physical space, so while we had less access
[Guest]: to books and there was no internet in the 80s, but we did, and I actually, I mean, me,
[Guest]: my brothers, we came up from a family which read a lot, you know, I was, I remember books
[Guest]: and comics and things of every kind in our household from my birth.
[Guest]: And my mother used to feed me anything that she thought I could read, and all of our brothers,
[Guest]: we read a lot.
[Guest]: So reading was natural and therefore in the 80s, while we didn't have direct access or
[Guest]: a quick access, because of this physical involvement or presence, because we happened to be in
[Guest]: a situation where there is so much foment and turmoil, you know, emergency, then Mrs.
[Guest]: Gandhi's assassination, you know, I mean, there was always turmoil, a major ones.
[Guest]: And which invariably makes one, at least made me curious to look and read to try to figure
[Guest]: out what's happening all around, because it's happening all around, literally.
[Guest]: For instance, you know, I still remember that when Indira Gandhi was assassinated in 84,
[Guest]: I was in a village in Sundarbans, and we were stuck for a week, because all connections
[Guest]: were broken.
[Guest]: But people were taking out rallies with, you know, chanting Indira's name and the flag
[Guest]: and all the rest, even in a remote village, which had no electricity, no toilets.
[Guest]: So you know, and that kind of made me wonder, and I came from a world which was very urban,
[Guest]: you know, I grew up completely in urban India.
[Guest]: So to grow up, to experience that, and to think that how different we can be and how
[Guest]: do we survive in such diverse situations, the marine engineering experience actually
[Guest]: only expanded that, because I joined the marine engineering primarily as my incentive was
[Guest]: to see the world at no cost, because I was not as intelligent as my brother, who could
[Guest]: go to an IIT and go to US for his higher studies.
[Guest]: And therefore, I had to be satisfied with less, and therefore, I thought marine engineering
[Guest]: would at least give me a chance to see the world at no cost, which it did.
[Guest]: But that, of course, actually increased my sense of curiosity or inquisitiveness or at
[Guest]: the gulf.
[Guest]: You know, so I remember one of my first letters to my mother from one of the ports I visited
[Guest]: was particularly a western port in Canada, that it does look like you see in Bollywood
[Guest]: films.
[Guest]: You know, till that time, I had no realization actually, because in our home, we didn't
[Guest]: have television till after 84-85.
[Guest]: So we had experience of the outer world primarily through films, you know, as a visual medium.
[Guest]: And the Bollywood was one kind, and we all knew that Bollywood either depicts things
[Guest]: that are too harsh, you know, the realistic ones, or are too fantastic.
[Guest]: But the harsh ones are something we don't directly experience, most of us, we haven't.
[Guest]: And the fantasy ones, we can only imagine.
[Guest]: Whereas in the West, in Canada, I found that the roads, the people are actually as what
[Guest]: you see in the films.
[Guest]: So that kind of was an eye-opener, that how could it be so different?
[Guest]: And that was probably my first introduction coupled with this experience in the village
[Guest]: after that for a few years, that there is something going on that we need to grapple
[Guest]: with.
[Guest]: You know, that why is this gulf?
[Guest]: Why is this gulf that my brother who could get admitted in the US and spend next 25 years
[Guest]: working for multinationals, could be an Indian, enjoy the Western standards, yet the family
[Guest]: and the community and the country is a century perhaps behind, in every which way, not just
[Guest]: financially, economically, but every which way, why?
[Guest]: So that was my kind of quest into actually trying to understand public policy as such.
[Guest]: And something that happened, which again, reflectively we know, because one of the stand-alone
[Guest]: thing about emergency is the Nasbandi, which everybody almost in North India, or perhaps
[Guest]: all over India knew, even as a youngster, I knew that something was happening, because
[Guest]: everybody talked about it.
[Guest]: So it was there, which basically was apart from the policy aspect of it, or the physical
[Guest]: torture and the grossness of it, the policy aspect of it was that population is a challenge.
[Guest]: And which would seem that population is indeed a challenge, how can you deal with people,
[Guest]: with so many people growing, etc.
[Guest]: That's when primarily one kind of another piece fell in place.
[Guest]: Because I used to read, I sometimes, or quite often actually, whenever I could, I could
[Guest]: visit British Council or American Library in Calcutta, just to read what's happening
[Guest]: elsewhere.
[Guest]: And I discovered Julian Simon, that was in 1986-87, just an accident, no one had told
[Guest]: me anything about that.
[Guest]: And I found he was a man who was arguing something very different.
[Guest]: And then in 1990, he won his famous bet, that while the population would increase, the prices
[Guest]: of some basic commodities that were decided on, would actually decline.
[Guest]: And there were some people, biologists and economists on the other side who said, since
[Guest]: the population is increasing, the prices would rise.
[Amit Varma]: Just to give context, the person on the other side of the bet was a guy called Paul Ehrlich,
[Amit Varma]: who was a famous Luddite, who was a famous sort of Malthusian rather, and a biologist,
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise a learned man, but completely wrong about this one subject.
[Amit Varma]: And so Julian Simon made a bet with him and said, no, growing population is a good thing
[Guest]: in 1980.
[Amit Varma]: And they made a bet about certain commodities, whether the prices will go up or down, where
[Amit Varma]: Ehrlich said, of course, they will go up because population will go up and there'll be less
[Amit Varma]: resources.
[Amit Varma]: And Simon said, no, no, no, no, no, they'll go down, wait and watch.
[Amit Varma]: And Simon, of course, won the bet.
[Amit Varma]: Sorry, continue.
[Guest]: Yeah, so that happened over, I mean, the bet was from 1980 to 1990 in the 10-year period.
[Guest]: And I began to read Simon early and late 80s, I mean, just as an accident.
[Guest]: And then I read the news that he's actually won the bet.
[Guest]: So that was kind of a startling this thing.
[Guest]: And because I was reading these at the American library, because there was no internet, I
[Guest]: found his address and wrote to him that this is amazing.
[Guest]: And because of the past 10 years where the population, demography, etc. was such a big
[Guest]: issue in India.
[Guest]: So I thought that I want to know more.
[Guest]: And that was kind of the single biggest spark as far as policy world is concerned, because
[Guest]: before that I had no idea of public policy as such as a kind of a domain by itself.
[Guest]: And Simon introduced me to the whole world of public policy and particularly free market
[Guest]: public policy and free market environmentalism.
[Guest]: And I kind of, my first 10 years was almost completely on how do we understand the market
[Guest]: in the, or the economics in the context of environment.
[Guest]: Simon wrote back to you when he wrote to you.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, he wrote back to me and I mean, we corresponded for the last eight years of
[Guest]: his life.
[Guest]: And he came to India, he and his wife came to India in 97, when we did our second conference,
[Guest]: so called libertarian conference in Deolali in 97.
[Guest]: And Simon passed away in 98.
[Guest]: And before that, he'd introduced me to a whole world of free market think tanks in Europe
[Guest]: and US particularly.
[Guest]: So all that excited me and my interest particularly was because one, the demographic battle, the
[Guest]: policy battle, which was so demonstratively won in my view as Simon won the bet.
[Guest]: But from all the others that I was seeing, because environment and population is related
[Guest]: to environment was such a big, I mean, it kind of interested me because I hadn't thought
[Guest]: about it.
[Guest]: And therefore, I thought, let's try to apply it and see.
[Guest]: So that was kind of my own way of self-education that let me take the biggest challenge that
[Guest]: people say it is there in terms of policy that what to do with environment.
[Guest]: And let's see if my understanding or my understanding of economics of markets, which I had not studied
[Guest]: at all in my through my education, I could help resolve it.
[Guest]: At least in my mind, even if I don't convince anyone else and which had some interesting
[Guest]: fallouts in the sense, for me personally, in the sense that I realized that being from
[Guest]: outside the disciplines, neither economics nor environment, I was relatively free to
[Guest]: ask anything and was only limited by my own lack of imagination or confidence.
[Guest]: You know that I didn't, that I hadn't studied environment or economics in my college or
[Guest]: school or whatever, or any formal way, didn't kind of deter me.
[Guest]: To me, because I had not studied it, I probably tried to understand it and apply it in a way
[Guest]: that I could, which was kind of, you know, I mean, I think was very, very helpful.
[Guest]: Because firstly, it gave me the confidence that I could think because at least in my
[Guest]: mind, I thought that what I am saying makes sense to me.
[Guest]: So that was very satisfying.
[Guest]: Secondly, they were in the late 80s, 90s, by that time, or mid 90s, I started writing
[Guest]: for newspapers, etc.
[Guest]: And while the editors, etc. may not have agreed with what I am saying, but they thought it
[Guest]: was new, it was different, and it was in a way related to the liberalizing tendency of
[Guest]: the society and the state at that point.
[Guest]: You know, the 90s was quite exciting in that sense, that people were exploring different
[Guest]: issues.
[Guest]: So I got some space to write.
[Guest]: So that was my first, first inter, what should I say, inter-immersion into the world of public
[Guest]: policy.
[Guest]: But there was another thing, another turning point, I think, during my shipping days, apart
[Guest]: from the gulf that I said before, was the coincidence, you know, ships generally had
[Guest]: libraries and videos, VCRs, but because I was more attracted to reading, so I did.
[Guest]: And one book, again, hardly, no one had actually recommended it, I just came across, which
[Guest]: was Ayn Rand's Atlas Shrugged.
[Guest]: So that was another of those kind of turning points in the mid 80s, that there is something
[Guest]: to it.
[Guest]: You know, that there is something that I need to explore which I hadn't thought of, and
[Guest]: which seems to make a lot of sense in where I am, that is, in India and in our context.
[Guest]: And because as I read Rand and read other things that she and others began to recommend,
[Guest]: that is how I kind of accidentally came across Julian Simon, that here is something I should
[Guest]: read because I thought it was interesting.
[Guest]: So you know, so those mid to late 80s was a kind of two big kind of stations in my journey,
[Guest]: Rand and Simon, and the next 10 years, in the 90s, I just did that.
[Guest]: That how do I apply?
[Guest]: How do I apply?
[Guest]: And in that search, you know, we had the Liberty Institute and all the rest as a public policy
[Guest]: think tank trying to copy or model on more Western think tanks.
[Guest]: We are perhaps one of the very few at that time who were very, very public and gung-ho
[Guest]: about liberty and free market and all the rest.
[Guest]: And so 90s went, you know, I mean, was personally and extremely hectic because I was involved
[Guest]: in so many issues, so many campaigns, so many policy dimensions, intellectual property,
[Guest]: environment, climate change, WTO, trade, yeah, I mean, I can't think of, there was no end
[Guest]: to the issues I could plunge into.
[Guest]: And that was exciting, not because I knew, but it gave me an opportunity to know something
[Guest]: I hadn't known before, you know, to explore that new world, new issue.
[Guest]: But the next one was this Sharad Joshi's movement, which is on hindsight, which I didn't realize
[Guest]: then.
[Guest]: Rand and Julian Simon, I realized while I was reading that I was reading something different
[Guest]: and I would like to explore it.
[Guest]: Sharad Joshi's intervention in 2000-2002, at that time, I was elated that we had won
[Guest]: a victory in terms of the policy dimension that the government changed its policy on
[Guest]: GM Cotton and GM Cotton was approved in 2002, in February or March 2002.
[Guest]: But it was more, you know, a feather in the cap, it was nothing more, I hadn't really
[Guest]: grasped the public part of the policy still, which took perhaps another 10 years of struggle.
[Guest]: And in that time, I was kind of getting more attracted to things that were happening on
[Guest]: the people dimension.
[Guest]: You know, I came to know about organizations who were acting on the ground to make things
[Guest]: change and particularly their focus, because they were coming from the ground, so their
[Guest]: focus was, or the starting point was the public, whereas my starting point was the policy.
[Guest]: So that, you know, so one major thing or exposure for me was the Arch Vahini, you know, in Gujarat.
[Guest]: I mean, I couldn't believe that I would, or I had never dreamt that I would ever come
[Guest]: across a grassroot organization who was so steeped into the ideas of liberalism and freedom
[Guest]: from their experience on the ground.
[Guest]: That to me was, you know, the next kind of a turning point and that change could happen.
[Guest]: So that was in the, you know, from the late 90s to early 2000s or mid-2000s or late 2000s.
[Guest]: So that's probably 10 years.
[Guest]: It took me to realize that what I am seeing is not an exception, but could be the rule,
[Guest]: you know, that we could reach out, that it is possible to reach out.
[Guest]: So what Sharad Joshi showed in actual performance of reaching out, here were people who were
[Guest]: on the ground, who could still relate their ideals and the people, you know, the ideals
[Guest]: of freedom and liberalism, etc., with the people and build from that.
[Guest]: Because most of, a lot of activism still, and more so then, were completely on the other
[Guest]: side, that we wanted the state to intervene to do this, that and the other, that we accepted
[Guest]: that people were helpless, ignorant, illiterate and all the troubles that they have, that
[Guest]: it's the responsibility of the society and the state to do something, to intervene as
[Guest]: aggressively as they can to root out some of these challenges.
[Guest]: And here was something that was arguing very differently.
[Guest]: And in that, another landmark was, and again, primarily because I probably would never have
[Guest]: observed it or had the opportunity to observe it in such close quarters, had I not come
[Guest]: to know Archwayane.
[Guest]: Because they were deeply involved in the forest rights movement for the tribal people for
[Guest]: a long time.
[Guest]: And then they were part of the groups that were mobilizing, campaigning for recognition
[Guest]: of the rights of the tribal people over their lands and local resources in the forest areas
[Guest]: where they live.
[Guest]: So that was taking place through the early 2000s.
[Guest]: And that was another policy change that I saw, not as directly, but through my personal
[Guest]: interaction with them primarily, that the government did change the policy.
[Guest]: They did pass an act in 2005, recognizing the rights of the tribal and indigenous communities
[Guest]: and others who live in conventional, traditional communities who are living in the forest areas,
[Guest]: whose rights are generally were not recognized till then, so that it was possible.
[Guest]: And the second learning was that legislative change would never be perfect.
[Guest]: It will only be incremental.
[Guest]: And we have to build from that again.
[Guest]: And it's because many times it happens that we think of a legislative victory and think
[Guest]: that the battle has been won forever.
[Guest]: No battles won forever, neither in GM cotton, which is a glaring example that we haven't
[Guest]: approved the third generation GM cotton since 2006 or 2008.
[Guest]: The world has moved on to the fifth, sixth, seventh generation of GM.
[Guest]: And not just in cotton, there are more than 12 GM crops that are being commercially grown
[Guest]: across the world.
[Guest]: But we are still debating and stuck with the second generation BT cotton that we had.
[Guest]: So the battle is never won.
[Guest]: The battle may be won at a particular point, but the war is a continuous one.
[Guest]: You have to keep fighting all the time.
[Guest]: And same with the Forest Rights Act.
[Guest]: Here was a change, which is a big victory for the people who fought for it.
[Guest]: I was more marginal in this, but I tried to understand it as closely as I could.
[Guest]: Because to me, what was interesting and to my friends in ARCH, that it was also a property
[Guest]: rights movement, which was one of the core beliefs or principles we held of a liberal
[Guest]: free world, that property in land and whatever else.
[Guest]: So it's not a perfect legislation, but it's still a step ahead of where we were.
[Guest]: And again, because of the people, you know, so things perhaps began to fall into place
[Guest]: that I really need to grapple with this people question even more.
[Guest]: And then, of course, I had some opportunity to be with them and see how their work were
[Guest]: actually progressing on the ground and what were the potential and what were the limitations
[Guest]: as well of reaching out, you know, how it can happen, whether the new communication
[Guest]: and other technologies available can help, which it did 10 years later with them in terms
[Guest]: of using satellite imageries and GPS to help people document their claims much, much better
[Guest]: than it was ever possible when the law was enacted in 2005.
[Guest]: And people are incrementally getting at least some rights recognized, although perhaps it's
[Guest]: far from satisfactory.
[Guest]: There are probably more people whose rights have not been recognized even 10 years or
[Guest]: 15 years after the law was passed then.
[Guest]: But like I said, it's a continuous journey.
[Guest]: Every generation, every community has to, every individual has to engage and fight for
[Guest]: what they stand for.
[Guest]: So that was, you know, that was the beginning of my trying to really move and try to understand
[Guest]: that I had missed something, that the people dimension.
[Guest]: So that probably has been the last 5-7 years and in fact, I just wrote to somebody that
[Guest]: the people dimension is a practitioner's issue.
[Guest]: Sharath Joshi was a practitioner.
[Guest]: He was not an ideologue.
[Guest]: You know, he was not an armchair ideologue.
[Guest]: I was an armchair ideologue.
[Guest]: I could write anything I wanted, anything my imagination would let me and be satisfied
[Guest]: with it.
[Guest]: But to implement, and that is where my engineering also fit in, that to implement we need practitioners.
[Guest]: Engineers are practitioners.
[Guest]: They are not theoretical physicists.
[Guest]: And Sharath Joshi was the first practitioner that I saw who made a difference.
[Guest]: Arch Vaini was another set of practitioners from rural India who had amazing achievements,
[Guest]: I think.
[Guest]: And as I looked into it, I rediscovered Gandhi, that here to me is the ideal practitioner.
[Guest]: Yeah, so it's been a long journey.
[Guest]: It's been a long journey, but I mean, to me, I mean, it's been a very exciting, exciting
[Guest]: journey.
[Guest]: Each breakthrough is, you know, to me, since I'm a non-believer, I don't go to temples
[Guest]: or have any prayer to say.
[Guest]: To me, these are as ecstatic or as I could, I could enjoy it as much as any other excitement
[Guest]: stimulus I could have, so.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll discuss Gandhi in length later.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll also double click on the Arch Vaini forest rights movements, because I think there
[Amit Varma]: are so many lessons there.
[Amit Varma]: So before we do that, an observation, a little setting of context, another observation, and
[Amit Varma]: then a couple of questions in that order.
[Amit Varma]: So my first observation is that, you know, I used to believe that many of the things
[Amit Varma]: we believe in are counterintuitive ideas, like the fact that every voluntary interaction
[Amit Varma]: between two people is a positive sum game, both people are better off, what I call the
[Amit Varma]: double thank you moment, or spontaneous order, the way it works, that you don't need something
[Amit Varma]: to be centrally directed, that societies and languages and cultures, you know, should not
[Amit Varma]: be centrally directed, they can run on their own.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought these are counterintuitive ideas, and people may not necessarily understand.
[Amit Varma]: And one experience which forced me to reconsider this notion of mine, was when you called me
[Amit Varma]: to that farmers conference in Deolali three years ago, where in fact, I had had that conversation
[Amit Varma]: with Gunawan Patilji episode 86.
[Amit Varma]: And there I realized that all of these people, farmers and farmer leaders held pretty much
[Amit Varma]: identical ideas to mine, except that those ideas did not come from books and thinking,
[Amit Varma]: they came from lived experience.
[Amit Varma]: And that these weren't necessarily that counterintuitive.
[Amit Varma]: It was from the fabric of their lives, they could devise these lessons, they could protest
[Amit Varma]: against the oppression of the state, and realize all the ways in which they were sort of held
[Amit Varma]: back.
[Amit Varma]: So that was a moment for me, which taught me that don't be condescending, don't be patronizing
[Amit Varma]: these people, you know, from their lived experience, they can arrive at, you know, similar ideas
[Amit Varma]: to you, except that they are in a sense deeper, because it's come from the bottom up.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not like a top down intellectual thing.
[Amit Varma]: The context I want to set is I want to click a little bit on the Julian Simon and the population
[Amit Varma]: thing, that this is a common trend through Indian history and a dangerous trend, which
[Amit Varma]: is why I want to click on it, that we assume that our population is the greatest of our
[Amit Varma]: problems.
[Amit Varma]: And this is also a belief that's been incentivized by others, for example, in the early 50s,
[Amit Varma]: I think the Ford Foundation in the late 50s and early 60s, rather, the Ford Foundation
[Amit Varma]: was giving incentives to India to do population control.
[Amit Varma]: Population control was a big theme, Sanjay Gandhi kind of believed in it and did a lot
[Amit Varma]: of coercive nonsense, Kumi Kapoor has a great book on the emergency, which talks about that
[Amit Varma]: absolute monster.
[Amit Varma]: And this belief has kind of persisted to the current day, where there are still incentives
[Amit Varma]: given for Nazbandis and population control and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And at the time we are recording in November, there have been rumors for a while that this
[Amit Varma]: government may do some population control policy.
[Amit Varma]: But the truth is, population is not a problem.
[Amit Varma]: Population is, in the words of Julian Simon, he wrote a book with this title, the ultimate
[Amit Varma]: resource.
[Amit Varma]: People are brains, not stomachs.
[Amit Varma]: This is fundamental.
[Amit Varma]: And one thing that illustrates this is that the movement of human beings throughout history
[Amit Varma]: has been a movement from villages and rural areas to cities and urban areas to places
[Amit Varma]: with more population density, because that population density is a feature, not a bug.
[Amit Varma]: You have deeper economic networks, more opportunities, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: That's why people go to cities.
[Amit Varma]: There's a great study by Nicholas Eberstadt in 2007 called Too Many People?
[Amit Varma]: And that found no correlation between population density and poverty.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Monaco has 40 times the population density of Bangladesh, Bahrain has three times
[Amit Varma]: the population density of India.
[Amit Varma]: So this is a terrible misconception and it's important to point that out because it leads
[Amit Varma]: to coercive policies on common people, which are crimes on humanity and this kind of thinking
[Amit Varma]: still continues.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm really glad that you kind of mentioned that.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: I never knew you'd corresponded extensively with Simon.
[Amit Varma]: The other sort of sideways observation I'll come to is Ayn Rand.
[Amit Varma]: In the sense it's become fashionable, for example, on Twitter, too shit on Ayn Rand.
[Amit Varma]: I got to say, I haven't read Rand, I tried and I didn't like the quality of the prose
[Amit Varma]: and just for that reason alone, I didn't.
[Amit Varma]: I've seen some of her quotes, which sound very interesting to me and I agree with them.
[Amit Varma]: For example, the smallest minority is an individual, which I think is something we should all internalize.
[Amit Varma]: But it's kind of become fashionable to have this thing about what is the worst book ever
[Amit Varma]: and people will say Fountainhead or Atlas Shrugged.
[Amit Varma]: And it's such a, you know, this speaks to a tendency within us to show our virtue by
[Amit Varma]: standing in judgment over others, like I am too good for that.
[Amit Varma]: That is so bad.
[Amit Varma]: See, I am so discerning, I know that is bad.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, that question itself, what is the worst book ever, is fundamentally flawed.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, whenever any of us starts reading a really bad book, we stop reading
[Amit Varma]: if we never read it, we don't complete bad books.
[Amit Varma]: So how are we in a position to judge what is the worst book ever?
[Amit Varma]: We simply are not and I bet that many of the people who write these things haven't read
[Amit Varma]: Rand and neither have I.
[Amit Varma]: And I know that we share many of the same beliefs about individual freedom and liberty
[Amit Varma]: and why consent is good and coercion is bad.
[Amit Varma]: And I have arrived at it through different places.
[Amit Varma]: And to some extent you and another person I also admire greatly, who's influenced by
[Amit Varma]: Rand, which is Alex Tabarrok, both of you have arrived at it through Rand.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd like you to kind of talk about the ideas that like, how does she change your
[Amit Varma]: thinking?
[Amit Varma]: What are the ideas?
[Amit Varma]: What are your thoughts of looking at the world that you got from Anne Rand?
[Guest]: You know, Rand was a, was kind of a shock.
[Guest]: That from everything that I had heard, read, experienced in the first 25 years, and I read
[Guest]: Rand relatively late in my life, I was already a graduate and all that.
[Guest]: Most people read Rand, begin to read Rand, it seems, in their school or high school or
[Guest]: college.
[Guest]: So I read Rand late and perhaps because we didn't have, there was no internet and there
[Guest]: was no such thing to get to acquaint with her and I read her by accident.
[Guest]: But the shock of it, that how could somebody think and provide a perspective which seems
[Guest]: to stand against or stand alone in the backdrop of everything we have read, heard, believed.
[Guest]: And what you said that, you know, and that the individual is the smallest minority in
[Guest]: any collective, no matter which group, whereas today we talk of all the minorities, minority
[Guest]: rights, etc., but we never consider the individual within those minorities.
[Guest]: Because that's the unifying bond, that could be the potentially unifying bond cutting across
[Guest]: various communities, ideological, ethnic, religious.
[Guest]: And second was that, and because perhaps, and this is perhaps my context, because I
[Guest]: came from engineering, I studied science, pure science, physics, chemistry, mathematics
[Guest]: throughout my education.
[Guest]: So I had no particular inclination or understanding of social sciences at all.
[Guest]: And that Rand could provide, and perhaps because I was a blank slate, Rand, at least in that
[Guest]: dimension, so Rand could provide a social science explanation for what's happening
[Guest]: in such a telling manner.
[Guest]: And which is probably why I think people, the books are pirated and I first, in fact
[Guest]: long before I even realized what intellectual property and copyright, etc., were, I used
[Guest]: to buy, and I still have some of those copies, bought copies from the streets of Calcutta
[Guest]: which were all, from today I know, they were all pirated.
[Guest]: You know, if people were not reading, no one would be pirating and copying and printing
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: And in those days, even photocopying was so difficult.
[Guest]: Yeah, photocopying was not as easy as it is today.
[Guest]: So all that, and which meant that in Calcutta I did, when I began to read, I began to really
[Guest]: read.
[Guest]: One, because reading came naturally to me, and secondly, I could look around and I could
[Guest]: find so many of her books and the books that she recommended and otherwise.
[Guest]: So that was, and my first impulse, in fact, not just me, another friend whom both of us
[Guest]: know, Parth, we came across each other in, around that time, 86 perhaps, because of our
[Guest]: common affinity to Rand.
[Guest]: And some others also, Rakesh Wadhwa, another friend you know, Ajay Gandhi, another friend
[Unknown]: you know.
[Unknown]: Wonderful man, so sad.
[Guest]: Yeah, we all, we all, so sad that he passed away so suddenly last month, amazing, I still
[Guest]: miss him each day, because he used to correspond so much on WhatsApp, almost on a daily basis.
[Guest]: So all these people I came to know, and many others, and most prominent of them, my wife.
[Guest]: That it's in the 80s, late 80s that we had these Aindran clubs in many parts of, many
[Guest]: cities of India.
[Guest]: And we used to circulate reading material and audio cassettes to listen to, because
[Guest]: you know, we had to literally post them from one place to another.
[Guest]: One group would listen to first few sets and pass the rest of the lectures to the next
[Guest]: group, etc.
[Guest]: So it was a large network, which is how I came to know some of these people in Tara
[Guest]: Malkani and Govind Malkani in Bombay.
[Guest]: So in that, in the personal journey, that period was interesting, because we were all
[Guest]: exploring to figure out, are there other people like us?
[Guest]: Or are we being taken for a ride?
[Guest]: You know, so it was amazing to discover Parth or so many others.
[Guest]: And that's how I met my wife, because she responded to one of these efforts.
[Guest]: And because she was in, she was from Calcutta, so we could meet up in 87, 88 perhaps, and
[Guest]: we married in 89.
[Guest]: And that's one person probably, I mean, I have no, I can't express how, how glad I am
[Guest]: for that coincidence.
[Guest]: Love at first sight.
[Guest]: Yeah, it was, it was, but more than that, she, I mean, much more than that, because
[Guest]: she's borne me for the last 30 years.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's not easy, because of my habits and because of my way of doing things, that
[Guest]: she's virtually subsidized a lot of what I do and what I think.
[Guest]: So that's been, on a personal level, an incredible, incredible journey.
[Guest]: And that we shared so much in common, at least, you know, the basic premises.
[Guest]: So that was, yeah, that was, RAND was in that sense, quite, I mean, quite startling.
[Guest]: Because I had, perhaps because I had not come from that world.
[Guest]: Maybe people from the social sciences who are already familiar with economics and social
[Guest]: issues, they have a frame and therefore can assess and therefore can reject RAND as much.
[Guest]: But I think most people do not, like me, so many people like me then, do not come from
[Guest]: a set perspective, because for any number of reasons, either we didn't, we're not educated
[Guest]: in that stream, or we are not practitioners in that stream.
[Guest]: You know, so that probably, and which is probably why people like RAND sell across the world
[Guest]: or continue to sell, how many years, 30 years after her death.
[Guest]: In 82 she died and the books are still being pirated.
[Guest]: I mean, this is a phenomenon I cannot, you know, one can't understand unless one feels
[Guest]: that there are people who are, of course, reading doesn't make one take it up in any
[Guest]: meaningful manner.
[Guest]: But to me, I mean, I probably took it up a little bit more than some others.
[Guest]: But that was, to me, that was my first and the Julian Simon was my next.
[Guest]: And one query, I mean, of course, RAND made me completely convinced me about the needlessness
[Guest]: of believing in God or a superhuman force or person or whatever.
[Guest]: So she completely cured me of that.
[Guest]: But what she didn't show, which kind of came to me much, much later, 20-25 years later
[Guest]: is, and what I said a little earlier, that the point is not about winning the debate,
[Guest]: the point is about winning over.
[Guest]: Sharad Joshi gave a glimpse of that winning over, Arch Vaini provided another glimpse
[Guest]: of trying to reach out and winning over people who may not be coming from your side.
[Guest]: And the ultimate one, for instance, for me is in this regard of winning over and not
[Guest]: being a practitioner to the core, to me is Gandhi.
[Guest]: Because public policy, and which again is my, you know, I mean, my re-reading of Gandhi,
[Guest]: that public policy, if you have to take people forward with you on the on issues that you
[Guest]: think deserve social, political capital to back it, then no one, I think, in the modern
[Guest]: era or perhaps ever, could reach out and connect at a scale and at a time that Gandhi did.
[Guest]: So that to me was, you know, so to me, in fact, this is my current, my latest passion,
[Guest]: that if I really believe that it is not about winning the debate, but winning over people
[Guest]: with whom I may disagree, it is not so much to convince them of my merits, but about legitimacy
[Guest]: of the different perspectives, because once we recognise the legitimacy of different perspectives,
[Guest]: then we will take a step back from imposing our perspective on others.
[Guest]: So that's the first step, and in that, I think, my current, this thing has been, I mean, I'm
[Guest]: completely into it, personally, as well as intellectually.
[Guest]: How do I reconcile, for instance, Rand with Gandhi?
[Guest]: You know, there would seem, until 10 years ago, I would have thought that it's not easy.
[Guest]: But precisely because it didn't seem easy, I'm now completely into it.
[Guest]: That if it's not easy, is there a way?
[Guest]: That how do we reconcile people and ideas that I think, and that many of us think, are
[Guest]: irreconcilable?
[Guest]: Is there something in the ideal, in the premises of socialism, which can be brought together
[Guest]: with the premises of a free society, for instance, or if there is Julian Simon's way of looking
[Guest]: at environment and consumption, etc.
[Guest]: That mind is the ultimate resource, and therefore, the more we consume, the more we have.
[Guest]: And which, to me, was one of my direct experiences, that when I spent a few years in the villages
[Guest]: of Sundarbans, we consumed hardly anything.
[Guest]: But we didn't even have tap water.
[Guest]: I mean, we had to really struggle to get clean water.
[Guest]: And we had no toilets.
[Guest]: So it was all outdoors.
[Guest]: And we had no consumption.
[Guest]: Yet when I saw the West, they were consuming so much, but it was so clean.
[Guest]: You know, so to me, it's not necessary that consumption leads to pollution, or there is
[Guest]: something called overconsumption leading to pollution.
[Guest]: So how do I reconcile Julian Simon with, again, Gandhi?
[Guest]: Because Gandhi would be seen as, you know, the famous quote, which is kind of tenuous,
[Guest]: but still, I mean, which is referred to, although he may not have actually said it, that the
[Guest]: world is enough for everyone's need, but not sufficient for everyone's greed.
[Guest]: Because then we don't, I mean, no one goes on to define what's need and what's greed
[Guest]: is.
[Guest]: And Gandhi was not an intellectual, he was not in the business of defining things in
[Guest]: that manner.
[Guest]: He was a practitioner.
[Guest]: We had to see it from his life.
[Amit Varma]: So some trends, one, I think that there might be a false dichotomy here, in the sense, I
[Amit Varma]: think it is possible to be like you probably are both a Randian and a Gandhian, in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that if you look at Rand in say, the business of ideas, that this is the way the
[Amit Varma]: world works.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, these are values which help move us to a better place, then that's a business
[Amit Varma]: of ideas.
[Amit Varma]: And Gandhi more in the business of that second aspect that you spoke about, how do you convince
[Amit Varma]: people?
[Amit Varma]: How do you bring people with you?
[Amit Varma]: How do you build mass movements, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that they're kind of orthogonal and can, you know, one can follow the other
[Amit Varma]: one can learn from Gandhi, how to build a movement, but not necessarily share many of
[Amit Varma]: his ideas.
[Amit Varma]: And as you know, I admire many of his ideas, I despise many of his ideas.
[Amit Varma]: People contain multitudes, there are all of those kind of angles.
[Amit Varma]: I want to now double click on again, something that you alluded to earlier and to just now
[Amit Varma]: where you said that once you sort of found this frame of looking at the world from Rand,
[Amit Varma]: from Simon and so on, you moved heavily into the environment, which I find really interesting,
[Amit Varma]: because, you know, people who support the free markets like you and me, talk about the
[Amit Varma]: beauty of markets.
[Amit Varma]: The most common counter given to them always is that, okay, fine, we accept that all voluntary
[Amit Varma]: transactions leave both people better off and markets are great and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: But what about externalities, what about the environment, what about pollution?
[Amit Varma]: What about the smog of Delhi?
[Amit Varma]: What about, you know, all of those things?
[Amit Varma]: Take me through sort of your thinking about all these issues, because that also seems
[Amit Varma]: a very interesting reconciliation to make, to be able to go into that domain like you
[Amit Varma]: did to, you know, to band with all the experts on it, and the practitioners on it, to enter
[Amit Varma]: mass movements, all the while, holding firm about how, you know, you need to look at it
[Amit Varma]: a little differently, that markets aren't evil, maybe they are the solution.
[Amit Varma]: So expand on that a little bit, because I'm sure many people who have this objection to
[Amit Varma]: free markets would be interested in knowing.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I was not looking at people at that point, primarily, I was looking at
[Guest]: it as a challenging intellectual exercise, which was very satisfying, because I was looking
[Guest]: into a problem differently, and I was applying it to our context in India, rather than what
[Guest]: one would hear or read from the Western or other context.
[Guest]: And you know, so for instance, I found it quite natural, which I know is not so natural.
[Guest]: But I found it natural in those days, one of the first questions that kind of struck
[Guest]: me is that how come we have more chickens than we have more tigers or elephants.
[Guest]: And that to me was relevant, because, and from personal experience too, because I grew
[Guest]: up at a time in the 60s, when there was hardly any chicken, you know, chicken was, I think
[Guest]: in our house, Bengali household, complete non-vegetarian all the time.
[Guest]: I think we had chicken only in the 70s, started having chicken only in the 70s, before that
[Guest]: it was mutton, the goat or at times if there are people coming from the village, it was
[Guest]: the duck, there was no chicken.
[Guest]: And my grandmother, as long as she was running the house, she would not let chicken be cooked
[Guest]: in the common chulha, you know, the coal-fired stove that we had, I mean that everyone had
[Guest]: at that time.
[Guest]: So, why is it that we have so many chickens?
[Guest]: You know, that was kind of a filling, I mean fill in the blank kind that how is it that
[Guest]: a western city, New York or London or Tokyo, where not just there is huge population, enormous
[Guest]: wealth and incredibly clean.
[Guest]: You know, so all the three were together, so that to me was my kind of lived experience
[Guest]: that there is something that we need to explore, that we need to understand.
[Guest]: And that is where I think Rand and the Simon and all the rest kind of, Rand for instance,
[Guest]: the basic advantage was that she provided an ethical frame of the idea of rights and
[Guest]: what's right and wrong as a first shot, which I hadn't thought of earlier.
[Guest]: And Julian Simon with his enormous information base on how things are changing, was that
[Guest]: you know, if this is really happening, then why isn't it happening here?
[Guest]: You know, and perhaps while India was reforming, liberalizing in 1990s, that was, I mean I
[Guest]: really didn't have the technical expertise to look into the fiscal policy or, you know,
[Guest]: things of that kind.
[Guest]: So my interest grew into environment because, you know, that was a big, you know, 92 was
[Guest]: the Rio summit.
[Guest]: So, you know, that was a big buzz and then WTO, so that was another big buzz.
[Guest]: So I plunged into it because there were big buzzes and because I wanted to know, I really
[Guest]: wanted to explore that is there something I can say or think which makes sense to me
[Guest]: firstly.
[Guest]: And if it makes sense to me, then I can take it forward.
[Guest]: So the environment fit in exactly in that post-Rio scenario.
[Guest]: And the more I looked, the more I felt that I can ask questions which people are not asking
[Guest]: and which needs to be asked.
[Guest]: For instance, why there are more chicken than tigers and this thing.
[Guest]: So I, one of my first, and not just chicken, there are more crocodiles, there are probably
[Guest]: 2 million crocodiles being killed across the world for the leather, whereas in India, crocodile
[Guest]: is an endangered species and harvesting and farming is illegal, prohibited.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: You know, and to me, that was one of my starting this thing and it was at around that time
[Guest]: probably, I do not remember the exact year now, that I came across, because I was exploring
[Guest]: these ideas, came across the ideas and experiences of a person, I do not know, I mean which most
[Guest]: Indians may not remember these days, Romulus Whitaker.
[Guest]: He, I do not know what his background was, but he set up a farm in outside Chennai, Madras.
[Guest]: And once, I think my wife and I, we were on that stretch of the East Coast and had visited
[Guest]: them once.
[Guest]: The answer, question was, here is a farm that was pioneer in the world in terms of figuring
[Guest]: out how to ensure a more efficient breeding of crocodiles, but has been prohibited from
[Guest]: breeding.
[Guest]: So that to me, perhaps because I was not coming from the stream, I had a frame which was different.
[Guest]: My experience and the frame, I was trying to link the two, because I had nothing else
[Guest]: to go by.
[Guest]: I had no baggage, so to say, to carry.
[Guest]: So that to me was my, you know, I mean, so when I wrote one of my kind of pieces, which
[Guest]: a lot of people remember 10-20 years after that, I still remember it, that New York Times
[Guest]: piece on tigers.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: But why could not it be?
[Guest]: Why can not we think?
[Amit Varma]: Why can not we imagine a world which is different?
[Amit Varma]: I'll quickly tell my listeners what that piece was, because I remember reading it and being
[Amit Varma]: absolutely mind blown.
[Amit Varma]: And your piece essentially made the argument, and I think it was in the context of China,
[Amit Varma]: that if you want to save tigers, and you know, make sure that they don't die out, the way
[Amit Varma]: to do it is to allow commercialization of tigers, because then people will be incentivized
[Amit Varma]: to breed tigers, and therefore the species won't die out exactly as has happened with
[Amit Varma]: chickens and crocodiles elsewhere in the world, but not here.
[Amit Varma]: And that is so counterintuitive, because your intuitive response when you think about how
[Amit Varma]: do I endanger a species is stop people from killing it.
[Amit Varma]: But your answer is do the opposite, and they will thrive and you know, the difference between
[Amit Varma]: chicken and tigers.
[Guest]: So sorry, continue.
[Guest]: But I just had to share.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: And to me, I mean, those are kind of my, in my intellectual journey, those were kind of,
[Guest]: you know, landmarks that how could I ask?
[Guest]: How could I think?
[Guest]: And I think this is where the demography, the population issue, and this issue also
[Guest]: fits in.
[Guest]: That, that it's not in the numbers, in terms of population.
[Guest]: And it's not in the scarcity in terms of tigers or chickens or crocodiles or whatever.
[Guest]: That these are all constructs and outcomes of certain way of looking at things.
[Guest]: And because of certain ways of looking at things, we construct our policies to fit that,
[Guest]: which may not be the whole story.
[Guest]: And at the back of my mind, and this is where, this is where kind of, you know, the other
[Guest]: dimension plays in and where both Rand and Gandhi is quite important, which is what happens
[Guest]: when you impose?
[Guest]: You know, we think we impose because we know.
[Guest]: What happens if we, if we are wrong, and we have imposed?
[Guest]: Emergency was a very good experience and a tragic one of what happened when somebody
[Guest]: believed in something and imposed it on others, and what was the cost?
[Guest]: You know, it was a human experience and a tragedy of enormous proportion, you know,
[Guest]: something comparable to, to, to what happened in some of the communist countries because
[Guest]: of the whims and fancies of their leaders.
[Guest]: That is where the ethics comes in.
[Guest]: That what do I really, even if I know, do I have the right to impose?
[Amit Varma]: What happens if I'm wrong?
[Guest]: And the impositions aren't just during the emergency, but all of our history, essentially.
[Guest]: The mindset continues.
[Guest]: It is this mindset that has impacted our policy on environment, on tigers or on everything.
[Guest]: The mindset is that, you know, that is where that we are looking at policy in a frame that
[Guest]: we have internalized without reflecting what impact or what's the relevance for it for
[Guest]: the public.
[Guest]: Like you said about, about the Northeast, what the people wanted and what the, what
[Guest]: the funding was, the state funding was aimed at doing.
[Guest]: So that gap, it's not just a gap, it's the mindset that makes us do that, which is where,
[Guest]: which is where carrying people along as Gandhi showed is so critical because we wouldn't
[Guest]: be able to carry people along if we persisted in, in, on that track for long.
[Guest]: I mean, that might be an initial, and we can see that we have so many campaigns on so many
[Guest]: social political issues, but what kind of a shelf life do they have?
[Guest]: You know, we need another campaign as if to overcome the current campaign.
[Guest]: Because the current campaign shelf life is over, so we need another drama to take it
[Guest]: forward to the, you know, take it, take the next, next campaign in order to keep the people
[Guest]: addicted to something.
[Guest]: So while we can keep doing it, but are we achieving anything meaningful or are we achieving
[Guest]: the kind of change that I'm sure most of us would agree on?
[Guest]: And I think, I think, yeah, so that ethics part, and then the natural this thing was,
[Guest]: which I think we've discussed earlier too, which is many of us may agree on the ends.
[Guest]: We need to look at the means.
[Guest]: We need to look at the means and we cannot achieve our ends unless the means relate to
[Guest]: the, to the ends.
[Guest]: And this is where even a non-believer, non-practitioner, non-temple grower, a beef-eating Hindu can
[Guest]: claim to be a Hindu, which I do, I have no reason yet to disown my legacy or my, yeah,
[Guest]: my legacy, my presence in the Hindu fold.
[Guest]: But I can completely relate, for instance, to the essence of Gita, you know, without
[Guest]: having any divinity in it.
[Amit Varma]: In fact
[Amit Varma]: The central message of the Gita is that the end justifies the means.
[Guest]: It's exactly the opposite.
[Guest]: The whole, yeah, it's exactly the opposite.
[Guest]: It's the whole quest for finding the means that the end is whatever.
[Amit Varma]: We agree that we have to win the war or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And the means is kill all your cousins.
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: Why and how you do it, the whole discourse is that, that a God, those who believe in
[Guest]: divinity of Krishna, couldn't dictate or order or press a button.
[Guest]: But he had to engage in such a dialogue at such a critical point in general to just convince
[Guest]: someone that this is why and this is how you should engage.
[Guest]: To me, it is this process.
[Guest]: That's the means.
[Guest]: Not the specifics or the details.
[Guest]: That's irrelevant.
[Guest]: It's this process of searching, of questioning continuously till you are convinced.
[Guest]: Now, the conclusion at a particular point in time may turn out to be wrong.
[Guest]: Later on, you have to change.
[Guest]: But that's life always.
[Guest]: So, my reading of Gita is completely different and I think my reading of Gita is actually
[Guest]: quite consonant with quite a few people who have actually interpreted Gita from the original
[Guest]: because I am reading in Bengali or in English.
[Guest]: But people who read it in Sanskrit, I mean, I find this essence of action detached from
[Guest]: the outcome is possible only when you have the capacity in your mind that you have got
[Guest]: the means right.
[Guest]: And then it's free for all.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I'm not an expert on the Gita.
[Guest]: Neither am I.
[Amit Varma]: And there are things I admire greatly about the book, for example, you know, I think Lord
[Amit Varma]: Krishna would have made a great poker player in just his lesson of don't worry about the
[Amit Varma]: fruits of your action, just do the right thing, which is very, you know, non-results oriented,
[Amit Varma]: process oriented, lots to learn there for modern sportsmen also.
[Amit Varma]: But then I look at, you know, what the Pandavas did, like our friend Mohit was pointing out
[Amit Varma]: last night at dinner that they killed almost all their main enemies by deception.
[Amit Varma]: I just feel that there's an issue there with the means, but that's a larger discussion
[Amit Varma]: and it's a great book on its own.
[Amit Varma]: I won't get into that.
[Amit Varma]: I do want to talk about means and ends and Gandhi after the break.
[Amit Varma]: But before the break, one more piece of context setting and then a joke that you might like
[Amit Varma]: and you must have heard.
[Amit Varma]: So the context setting is that I also want to double click on what you said earlier for
[Amit Varma]: the reader's benefit, that in the Western world, the consumption is high, the wealth
[Amit Varma]: is high and the air is clean.
[Amit Varma]: And this is like something that I remember is counterintuitive.
[Amit Varma]: And I first read about it in Beyond Lombok's book, The Skeptical Environmentalist when
[Amit Varma]: it came out 16 or 17 years ago.
[Amit Varma]: Great book then, kind of outdated now, but do follow Beyond Lombok's recent writings
[Amit Varma]: if you can.
[Amit Varma]: The revelation there was that London at the end of the 19th century was possibly as polluted
[Amit Varma]: as Bombay is today or even Delhi is today.
[Amit Varma]: All these great Western cities were incredibly populated.
[Amit Varma]: But there was like a sort of a bell curve of pollution that once you reached a certain
[Amit Varma]: level of economic growth and a certain level of wealth, these cities started becoming cleaner.
[Amit Varma]: The Kuznets curve in a sense, you could also apply that.
[Amit Varma]: And they started getting much, much cleaner because technology became better, people started
[Amit Varma]: applying ingenuity, citizens became more empowered and demanded cleaner air, combination of reasons
[Amit Varma]: and the wealth that enabled it.
[Amit Varma]: And the wealth that enabled it.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, a city like London today consumes much more than it used to, has many more people
[Amit Varma]: than it used to, and is much, much cleaner than it used to.
[Guest]: And the last I heard was Thames, the water in the Thames is potable.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: Unbelievable.
[Guest]: And that it happened, you know, 150 years Londoners and English literature has been
[Guest]: lamenting, you know, the fog, the famous Jack the Ripper and the London fog at the turn
[Guest]: of the last century.
[Guest]: But post war, in about less than 20 years, things had changed so dramatically, you know,
[Guest]: and post colonization because London was no longer the imperial capital during that phase,
[Guest]: it lost most of its, almost all of its colonies, yet the city, and it's not just about London.
[Amit Varma]: So many other cities.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, not just cities.
[Guest]: England today has more trees standing and more wooded areas than a century or more ago.
[Guest]: United States today has more trees standing and more wooded areas than a century ago.
[Guest]: How has it happened?
[Guest]: You know, so we need to, so to me, it is this relationship between the lived experience,
[Guest]: provided we are willing to open our eyes to see what has happened and then trying to figure
[Guest]: out how and why it has happened.
[Guest]: So that we can see what are the lessons that can be drawn, because we don't have to, you
[Guest]: know, the Kuznets curve, actually the beauty of the Kuznets curve is because societies
[Guest]: that are developing later, like India is and many others, can leapfrog.
[Guest]: So the peak of pollution, which the Western societies industrialized, the societies that
[Guest]: were industrializing at first, that level should not be, need not be reached by anyone
[Guest]: who's following.
[Guest]: So we should make that turn much quicker, provided we get the lessons and the perspectives
[Amit Varma]: right.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And then Steven Pinker has also written very eloquently about, you know, how we think the
[Amit Varma]: world is getting worse, but actually it is just such a much better place.
[Amit Varma]: And now the joke I promised you before we go to the break, and this has something to
[Amit Varma]: do with what you mentioned about how when you were a kid, you wouldn't eat chickens
[Amit Varma]: and you'd sometimes, you'd eat a lot of mutton and sometimes you'd eat ducks.
[Amit Varma]: Now ducks, as you know, the Hindi word for ducks is batak, right?
[Amit Varma]: So there is this famous story about how Gyani Zayal Singh, when he was president of India,
[Amit Varma]: he was in England and the Queen of England took him on a walk around the, you know, Buckingham
[Amit Varma]: Palace or wherever the Royal Gardens are.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a pond there and there were some beautiful ducks there.
[Amit Varma]: And Gyani Zayal Singh turned to the Queen and said, Madam, you have lovely buttocks.
[Guest]: Of course, for a Bengali, that's not exactly the word we use for ducks.
[Amit Varma]: What's the word you use?
[Amit Varma]: Harsh.
[Guest]: But buttocks, I'm right, right?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, in Hindi, that's what you'd say.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: Delightful.
[Amit Varma]: But of course, I had the fish option too, being a Bengali, fish is our second special.
[Amit Varma]: March.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Great.
[Amit Varma]: So let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other side of the break, we'll talk about means and ends, Gandhiji, forest
[Amit Varma]: rights and the importance of GPS.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog, India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me, and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons, and now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com, where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with my good friend, Varun Mitra about his life, his learnings and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there's this book I read by Arnab Kling called The Three Languages of Politics.
[Amit Varma]: And Kling's central premise there is that many of us when we discuss politics, we are
[Amit Varma]: not talking to each other, we are talking past each other.
[Amit Varma]: Like for example, he talks about how all three tribes and he's speaking of the three American
[Amit Varma]: tribes.
[Amit Varma]: I'll start from different first principles.
[Amit Varma]: So for example, a libertarian will value freedom, a conservative will value tradition, and a
[Amit Varma]: more left liberal orientation will value equality.
[Amit Varma]: And the point is, every argument then becomes a question of talking past each other.
[Amit Varma]: Because both can be equally coherent and equally persuasive, but they're coming from different
[Amit Varma]: first principles, and they're not taking the other one into account.
[Amit Varma]: So one of the great lessons of that, therefore, is when we talk to other people, rather than
[Amit Varma]: talk from our own point of view that I am communicating what I know to be right, we
[Amit Varma]: have to understand where they are coming from and talk to them at that level, and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth, get into that kind of dialogue, which is something that increasingly you have
[Amit Varma]: also tried to do over the years.
[Amit Varma]: Now what we see today on social media is that people harden themselves into firm positions
[Amit Varma]: like it's very intoxicating when you're young, you get on social media, you want to belong
[Amit Varma]: and you want to feel respected and you want to feel right.
[Amit Varma]: And so you join these little tribes, whatever they are, the bhakts, the voks, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And then within that tribe, then you constantly want to raise your status within that tribe.
[Amit Varma]: And the only way of doing that is number one, of course, you follow the party line and the
[Amit Varma]: dogmas at all points in time.
[Amit Varma]: But you also do it by attacking people on the other side, never addressing the argument,
[Amit Varma]: never getting into a dialogue, just insults and quote tweets and snark.
[Amit Varma]: And you also shit on people on your own side for failing purity tests within the tribe.
[Amit Varma]: And everyone gets hardened into position.
[Amit Varma]: Like I was discussing this with Abhinandan as well, that, you know, he and I are the
[Amit Varma]: same age 47 and when we were 20, you know, we thought ridiculous things.
[Amit Varma]: If he would have tweeted then we might well have felt committed to those positions and
[Amit Varma]: become that kind of person who thought that kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: Instead of gradually having dialogues with people and learning from them and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth.
[Amit Varma]: What do you feel about this?
[Amit Varma]: Because in a sense, over the last five or six years, whatever conversations you and
[Amit Varma]: I have had, the one thread that I feel I can learn a lot from, from you, from the way that
[Amit Varma]: you think about it, is the importance of just dialogue, reaching out.
[Amit Varma]: The person who does not agree with you is not your enemy.
[Amit Varma]: She is not a bad person.
[Amit Varma]: You got to reach out, you got to sit down, you got to talk.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about, you know, your thinking on this, how it's evolved and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, what to you is a way forward in these deeply polarized times at building bridges?
[Guest]: Yeah, again, like I said, you know, that this, this, I mean, I read Arnold Kling and I would
[Guest]: say it's, it's a, it's a very common feature these days.
[Guest]: And not just these days, for the last 10-15 years, that ideas become ideologies and ideologies
[Guest]: become identities.
[Guest]: And therefore, our questioning, if somebody questions my ideas, I can perhaps take it
[Guest]: to a little extent.
[Guest]: If somebody questions my ideology, I become harder.
[Guest]: And if it threatens my identity, it's impossible.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's impossible.
[Amit Varma]: And because one becomes the other, anyone who questions your ideas is almost, it's a
[Guest]: personal threat.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Because ideas, you know, as long as it's abstract, you'd hold it, you know, like you'll be able
[Guest]: to tolerate a slight variation.
[Guest]: Once it becomes ideology, which is almost like belief, these are your core principles,
[Guest]: as you, as one would say, then it's related, you're relating to its identity.
[Guest]: And which is where, you know, which is where I think another thing, I'm probably rephrasing,
[Guest]: rephrasing Gandhi, that, that your political opponents are not enemies to be vanquished,
[Guest]: but critics or friends to be won over.
[Guest]: And that, and which he wrote even in his last days, that, that burned down everything that
[Guest]: I have written.
[Guest]: If you want to really know what's my position on a particular thing, only read, if you want,
[Guest]: the latest thing, otherwise just look at my life.
[Guest]: That you know, that a person who can change, and this is what ideology does, ideology,
[Guest]: once it gets linked to identity, it makes us, makes us blind.
[Guest]: Because then anything that changes, if we change, like say, if we have a different perspective
[Guest]: from what we had five years or 10 years ago, then it's a threat.
[Guest]: We will not even acknowledge it.
[Guest]: And I think this is a struggle.
[Guest]: I mean, all of us have gone through it.
[Guest]: I mean, and perhaps because I'm in, perhaps because of the context in which we all of
[Guest]: us are in terms of the polarization and the divisions, I mean, and because of my kind
[Guest]: of instinctive, this thing that can we reconcile the so-called irreconcilable, you know, for
[Guest]: instance, economics and environment.
[Guest]: Can economic growth be reconciled with environmental cleanliness?
[Amit Varma]: And it actually is.
[Guest]: And it actually is.
[Guest]: And therefore, can I reconcile these differences?
[Guest]: And in that, from all in the last 20 years, what I've been seeing, the only instances
[Guest]: that I can think of, or have experienced, or have read, are of people who reached out.
[Guest]: That the connection was people first.
[Guest]: The second was, you know, then we can accept the ideological or intellectual differences
[Guest]: as something we can take in our strides.
[Guest]: Because we know.
[Guest]: And this we have seen.
[Guest]: For instance, you know, we have seen in so many cases that once we establish that relationship
[Guest]: and this I particularly saw in Sharad Joshi's case as a personal experience, that I used
[Guest]: to wonder, because that was in the early, late 90s, early 2000s, that how has he collected
[Guest]: this motley group of farmers leaders, many of whom were not as intellectually pure as
[Guest]: I would like them to be.
[Guest]: And they were not even as pure as Sharad Joshi was.
[Guest]: But they worshipped Sharad Joshi.
[Guest]: That's the connection.
[Guest]: That once you build the personal bond, you will be enormously flexible in terms of to
[Guest]: what extent you are going to be able to reconcile the intellectual or the policy differences
[Guest]: that one may have.
[Guest]: Because that can come over time, over experience, etc, etc.
[Guest]: But the first thing is, you know, what you said at the beginning, like my teacher in
[Guest]: my primary school in MP had, that she wanted to connect with me because I was an outsider,
[Guest]: because I came with so much handicap, no language, no local language.
[Guest]: You know that, that if we can build that into us, then we will be able to face this challenge
[Guest]: that we face today.
[Guest]: Because this challenge is particularly getting exaggerated by the technology and the systems
[Guest]: that we are currently adopting.
[Guest]: It is suicidal that we have to connect and which is why going back to the people is so
[Guest]: critical.
[Guest]: So, it seems that today with the technology, we could reach out to millions, perhaps your
[Guest]: podcast reaches out to millions and there are many programs, people who are reaching
[Guest]: out to millions.
[Guest]: But it's not helping in building a community in any meaningful sense.
[Guest]: It's only at best, it's building an intellectual community and therefore, it's not being able
[Guest]: to bridge this or not bridge it, it's not being able to break this bond between identity
[Guest]: and ideology.
[Guest]: We need to figure out how to do that and I think the only way, the only experience, the
[Guest]: only experience I can think of are from the people like Sharad Joshi or even to an extent
[Guest]: Archbhaini who are actually reaching out to people.
[Guest]: Doesn't matter how many you convince, it's not the conviction that winning over will
[Guest]: may happen later.
[Guest]: But if we first build that relationship, the human relationship, because after all, all
[Guest]: of us say that man is a social animal.
[Guest]: But we have transferred that society from the real life to the virtual life, which is
[Guest]: I think part of which is greatly creating this problem and this problem has now been
[Guest]: kind of is going to get, my fear is that it may get much more serious because now across
[Guest]: the world, as a fallout of the pandemic, we are instilling a sense of fear for the other,
[Guest]: including my immediate neighbor and we are putting in place things which would make freedom
[Guest]: of assembly and association almost impossible.
[Guest]: And this is a dream of anyone who is seeking power over others.
[Guest]: Because if people can't come together, can't share, can't experience each other, they are
[Guest]: going to be atomized even further.
[Guest]: Who gains?
[Guest]: Those who have certain degree of ability to control at least their network.
[Guest]: And if they are dominant, there is no way to break it.
[Guest]: So I think it is, and this is global, this has nothing to do with India or anything else.
[Guest]: This is a universal phenomenon.
[Guest]: To me, it's amazing, isn't it amazing?
[Guest]: Because 91 was India's liberalization, 90 was the collapse of the Soviet Union, 89 was
[Guest]: the Tiananmen Square in China.
[Guest]: From that to today, it seems it's the Chinese approach or policy or politics that have won
[Guest]: the world.
[Guest]: Whereas it was supposed to be the other way around.
[Guest]: You know, 89, the collapse of the Berlin Wall and all the rest, I mean, it was a sign that
[Guest]: the world is changing.
[Guest]: 91 followed immediately after.
[Guest]: You know, so it was while none of us, I know I have been asking people who were involved
[Guest]: in 91 reforms, there's no one who could honestly say that they recognize what could be the
[Guest]: potential of this till about 10 years after 91.
[Guest]: It is only going into the 2004 election that a political party like Vajpayee claimed India
[Guest]: shining and tried to claim the legacy of liberalization.
[Guest]: No one since, no one after.
[Guest]: And in this process, in fact, I mean, I'm not so sure because I don't follow technology
[Guest]: as such, but there's something that I've been listening a lot, I mean, you must, I'm sure
[Guest]: you know him, I mean, know of him at least.
[Guest]: Jonathan Haidt.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: You know, he is specifying a date, which is amazing, if it's true.
[Guest]: He is specifying 2014-15 or thereabouts as a turning point.
[Guest]: And what's the turning point?
[Guest]: That like buttons on the social media.
[Amit Varma]: I think he talks about 2010-2011, he was a guest on a podcast I produced called Brave
[Amit Varma]: New World, which I linked from the show notes and he did a great episode there, which is
[Amit Varma]: this quest for validation drives, hardens our position and drives us into these echo
[Amit Varma]: chambers in this much greater way and exacerbates the whole process and the Twitter retweet
[Amit Varma]: and the Facebook like are sort of a critical part of that.
[Amit Varma]: And a few observations that, one, I think what often happens is that the more solidified
[Amit Varma]: our sense of identity, whether it is identity as something we are born into or whether it
[Amit Varma]: is a tribe we have chosen, the more solidified that sense, the more it separates us from
[Amit Varma]: others.
[Amit Varma]: The more it forces us to think of people in terms of the other.
[Amit Varma]: So you want these to be kind of more fluid.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, this is actually what I, you know, one of the reasons in my podcast, as
[Amit Varma]: you've noticed in my episodes, I will often have this long personal conversation at the
[Amit Varma]: start before I go on to whatever work I'm discussing is because I want to humanize a
[Amit Varma]: person because I don't just want it to be about a subject or a theme.
[Amit Varma]: And when you humanize a person, listeners then become much more receptive.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they may then disagree with the person, but the person is not an enemy.
[Amit Varma]: The person is not bad.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that openness to ideas and communication is so important and we've kind of lost that
[Amit Varma]: and that other, you know, you use the phrase atomized and one very shallow critique of
[Amit Varma]: say libertarianism, for example, though I no longer use labels or ascribe them to myself,
[Amit Varma]: but one shallow critique of that kind of classical liberalism slash libertarianism is that thinking
[Amit Varma]: in terms of individuals atomizes you.
[Amit Varma]: And it's actually the other way around, because we are all for voluntary interaction and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So the richness of social interaction is very key to that.
[Amit Varma]: What I would say is the opposite thinking in terms of groups, and not individuals, that
[Amit Varma]: is what can atomize you in the manner that you sort of described and that can, you know,
[Amit Varma]: instead of letting us express the multitudes that we contain, it will often force us into
[Amit Varma]: certain other conceptions of ourselves, whether it's a conception of victimhood or a conception
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, intellectual superiority over others or whatever it is.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of dangerous.
[Amit Varma]: And you have said that we can fight this.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't know how.
[Amit Varma]: I'm trying to imagine in my head.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me, how can we fight this?
[Guest]: I don't know if fight would be the right word to say this.
[Amit Varma]: Fight the phenomenon.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, the phenomenon.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So the, yeah, that's where the problem is, because if the other side is identified, then
[Guest]: of course, you end up more like that you are ending up fighting with the person identity
[Guest]: rather than the ideas.
[Guest]: So that's always a challenge.
[Guest]: But I think to me, from everything that I've seen, experienced, read, tried to understand
[Guest]: in particularly in the last 10 years, suggests that we have to reconnect.
[Guest]: And the pandemic has only confirmed that, that we have to reconnect, which means we
[Guest]: have to be physical.
[Guest]: You know, the atomization is not, like you said, it is atomization within the group.
[Guest]: You know, so which means that it is, we think we are being individualistic without realizing
[Guest]: that we are part of this group, which is actually fueling us to be that kind of an individual.
[Guest]: So which means, you know, a person could be like, say, for instance, the hippies of the
[Guest]: past.
[Guest]: They all thought that they were ultra individuals.
[Guest]: But in a sense, in a way, in another way, looking at it another way, they are part of
[Guest]: a collective.
[Guest]: That collective had that feature.
[Guest]: So I think we need to figure out how do we, how do we look at and understand atomization
[Guest]: in the context of the invisible collective that we are all forming all around us.
[Guest]: And those boundaries are becoming, like you said, are becoming solider by the day.
[Guest]: And therefore, I think is, at least personally, as a personal exercise, and perhaps also because
[Guest]: I'm not used to, I didn't get used to the Zoom and the online meetings, conferences,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: Because I want to feel the energy of the people with whom I'm interacting in a group or in
[Guest]: a meeting.
[Guest]: So it has never worked for me in the last 18 months.
[Guest]: But so that maybe I'm personally biased then.
[Guest]: But my, this thing is that we need to reconnect and reconnect physically.
[Guest]: We need to reconnect in a manner which we haven't forgotten to do in the last 19, 20
[Guest]: or even 30 years, because with urbanization has come mobility.
[Guest]: With mobility has come a breakdown of a civic community and formation of professional communities
[Guest]: or business communities or things of which are segmented identities.
[Guest]: But not a civic identity, not a community identity, for instance, you know, just think
[Guest]: and this is something I realized in the last 10, 15 years.
[Guest]: Just think of my father, he was in politics, Bengal was extremely polarized, even at that
[Guest]: time in the 70s.
[Guest]: In the 69, I think it was 69 or could have been 67, I don't remember now.
[Guest]: There was an election in Bengal, the Congress lost for the first time.
[Guest]: My father's candidate, I think lost, I don't even remember that because I was probably
[Guest]: you know, 67 or 69.
[Guest]: So the net result was that for the first time there was a coalition government in Bengal.
[Guest]: But that election night is one of those terrifying moments that I have, that I've lived in
[Guest]: my memory.
[Guest]: You know, some of the childhood memories, so to say.
[Guest]: For instance, one that lives is actually, yeah, is we have an old fashioned house, you
[Guest]: know, the traditional conventional house, which is kind of not an apartment, a house
[Guest]: with big gates or doors, you know, solid wooden doors, which used to look at as a fortress.
[Guest]: And which would look from inside and from the outside, it would look imposing gate and
[Guest]: imposing wall to block everything out.
[Guest]: That gate broke down after my father's candidate or the party lost.
[Guest]: The party definitely lost.
[Guest]: I don't know whether, I don't remember whether my father's candidate lost, but the door broke
[Guest]: down because in the celebration that was happening outside, because the other side has won, the
[Guest]: left has won, there were some who came and rammed a rickshaw or a thela of some kind,
[Guest]: which virtually ramrod onto our gate and that gate with its iron bars, the wooden gate with
[Guest]: its iron bars fell.
[Guest]: You know, we were shocked because, you know, that was one thing that we, that was a symbol
[Guest]: of our security in our home for, you know, for a child like us, that this is something
[Guest]: that this is where the home begins and everything is secure.
[Guest]: That was a shock.
[Guest]: And I have not forgotten that that noise and that it happened.
[Guest]: And it was, it happened probably at 9.30, 10 o'clock, so relatively late because we
[Guest]: had all had our dinner and all that.
[Guest]: So we kind of shook up.
[Guest]: But my father told me afterwards, much after that, that he could have been killed that
[Guest]: night.
[Guest]: But for the left or the CPM leader who lived just next door, literally assured him that
[Guest]: nothing will come, no harm will come to you and your family.
[Guest]: It's incredible.
[Guest]: Can we think of that today?
[Guest]: You know, here were two people who were, you know, there may have been five years age difference,
[Guest]: he may have been older or younger, whatever.
[Guest]: They both fought a hard-fought election.
[Guest]: For the first time, Congress lost Bengal.
[Guest]: Our home was assaulted.
[Guest]: And this man said that nothing will, no harm will come to you.
[Guest]: Can we think of that today?
[Guest]: Can we think of that?
[Guest]: Because my father told me he could have been murdered that night, that of course he told
[Guest]: me 10 years later, that he could have been murdered that night.
[Guest]: And which we can see, this is a common thing happening today.
[Guest]: How has it happened?
[Guest]: Because their social bond with this neighbor, even for us, you know, I mean, long after
[Guest]: all this, you know, my father got out of politics and he retired, we were still neighbors.
[Guest]: You know, every time I returned to Calcutta after my college or holidays or whatever,
[Guest]: he would sit in his veranda and greet me.
[Guest]: And sometimes give me something to eat or munch or whatever.
[Guest]: Whereas in his house, you know, like in Calcutta, that was the fashion, the CPM slogans would
[Guest]: all be written.
[Guest]: And in our house, exactly the opposite.
[Guest]: That's my lived experience.
[Guest]: It's not impossible.
[Guest]: It's because the two people had their social bonds predating or overcoming their ideology
[Guest]: and identity.
[Unknown]: We need to rebuild that.
[Guest]: That can't happen in the digital world.
[Guest]: That can never happen in the digital world, very rarely, I can't say never, very rarely.
[Guest]: Because we are not meeting people.
[Guest]: We are only meeting people or coming across people only in the dimension in which we want
[Guest]: to be.
[Guest]: Not in the totality of our existence, because economics is not, you know, economics is not
[Guest]: even 5% of our existence or politics or any such, or hobby or any such thing.
[Guest]: These are tiny fractions of our life.
[Guest]: So physical meeting, I think, is primary and which is what I think we really must figure
[Guest]: out how do we revive.
[Guest]: You know, like I was just saying before we started, that what about the libraries that
[Guest]: we have?
[Guest]: There used to be mohalla libraries.
[Guest]: The libraries were not just books for information and now we can read on the net or on the computer.
[Guest]: There were also physical spaces for people to meet and chat and discuss things.
[Guest]: You know, they could read newspaper together, they could discuss a policy issue together
[Guest]: and all of us have seen that there is a huge difference when we behave and interact with
[Guest]: somebody face to face, even when that somebody has a completely different perspective or
[Guest]: philosophy or ideology or politics than us, which is a complete contrast to how we behave
[Guest]: when we are on the net, you know, in the virtual world.
[Guest]: One because we can hide our identity, so that only adds to the problem.
[Guest]: But even if we have our identity, because we think that we don't know each other personally
[Guest]: and therefore we can say whatever we want, which we'll never do, you know, in our discussion
[Guest]: at a tea stall that was common and is still common in large parts of India.
[Guest]: We need to revive that because I think intellectually we are driving down a rabbit hole.
[Amit Varma]: It's called the online disinhibition effect, what you just described and you know, I did
[Amit Varma]: an episode I keep going back to with Anshul Malhotra and I think one of the stories, if
[Amit Varma]: I remember correctly, she told in that and she of course wrote a book on partition and
[Amit Varma]: people carrying the effects of partition over the other side.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't remember whether we spoke about it in the episode or I read it in a book.
[Amit Varma]: But I remember being struck by this description of a village somewhere in Western Pakistan,
[Amit Varma]: where there were Hindus and Muslims and they used to gather in the evening and listen to
[Amit Varma]: the radio for news in those pre partition days and try to figure out what's happening.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously those social bonds are very strong.
[Amit Varma]: They're all neighbors, they live together in the same village.
[Amit Varma]: But over time, as bad news starts coming, those bonds start getting shakier and shakier
[Amit Varma]: and shakier.
[Amit Varma]: And my sense over a long time is that there is this difference between the abstract and
[Amit Varma]: the concrete and the world that we build in our head.
[Amit Varma]: Some things are abstract and some things are concrete, like Anshul would say that when
[Amit Varma]: she would meet with families in Pakistan, because of their experiences, they would say,
[Amit Varma]: Oh, Hindus are like this, Hindus are like that, but you are fine, you are not like that.
[Amit Varma]: Because she is there in the concrete, they can see the physical person, but they're different.
[Amit Varma]: And that's one of the challenges that online everything becomes abstract.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if I think of all the dangerous things in the world today, they're abstract notions,
[Amit Varma]: nationalism, patriotism, the other, the purity of our culture, Sanskriti, all of this abstract
[Amit Varma]: shit is a problem.
[Amit Varma]: It makes us hate each other.
[Amit Varma]: But in person, we are not like that.
[Amit Varma]: Even if you hold a different ideology, even if you hold a different ideology in person,
[Amit Varma]: it's different.
[Amit Varma]: It's not like that at all.
[Amit Varma]: Like I'm reminded and this is a book I'll send you and you'll enjoy it.
[Amit Varma]: There's a book called Think Again by Adam Grant, where he talks about how in 1983, this
[Amit Varma]: pianist called Darryl Davis goes to Maryland, and he performs there.
[Amit Varma]: And he's an African American musician.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a white gentleman in the audience who goes to him after the shows and says,
[Amit Varma]: I really love that.
[Amit Varma]: And they chat for a while.
[Amit Varma]: And it turns out the white gentleman is from the KKK, the Ku Klux Klan, and they meet and
[Amit Varma]: the white gentleman begins to realize that what he thought of in the abstract is very
[Amit Varma]: different from what it is in the concrete, that here is this African American gentleman
[Amit Varma]: who's warm, cultured, intelligent, someone who can be a friend and they become friends.
[Amit Varma]: And he leaves the KKK.
[Amit Varma]: But what he also does is over a period of time, he brings other members of the KKK to
[Amit Varma]: see this performance by Darryl, and they become friends and some of them are senior people,
[Amit Varma]: and they all leave.
[Amit Varma]: And it's like the collision of the concrete and the abstract.
[Amit Varma]: And when I read this, I was wondering that in the modern world, how do we do this?
[Amit Varma]: Because one thing that is very real, and that you and I know, and we can say it explicitly
[Amit Varma]: today, because people are expressing it explicitly today.
[Amit Varma]: One thing that is very real is this anti-Muslim sentiment among so many Hindus.
[Amit Varma]: And I believe that at some level, this is abstract, wherever it comes from.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe it comes from memories or stories of partition.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe it comes from stereotypes of what they are like.
[Amit Varma]: But at some level, this is abstract and concrete encounters can change this.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, if you look at it, you can look at someone like a Modi and say he's an Islamophile,
[Amit Varma]: because after all, the dress that he wears, the elegant churidhar kurtas are from there.
[Amit Varma]: And the food that we eat, the biryanis that we eat, or really any food, I mean, besides
[Amit Varma]: a baingan, I think basically everything else has come from outside, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So to me, this is the puzzle that in this modern world, and something for the listeners
[Amit Varma]: to think about as well, because I don't have an answer.
[Amit Varma]: But I think part of the solution has to be to help people engage more in the concrete
[Amit Varma]: world, including with those they hate, and they consider the other.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that that's the key.
[Amit Varma]: And we need to have more of that happening.
[Amit Varma]: And how do we do that?
[Amit Varma]: And what are your sort of thoughts?
[Guest]: You know, I mean, one thing, I actually experienced it myself twice, I had an opportunity to visit
[Guest]: Pakistan, and 10 years ago, 11, 12 years ago, I had an opportunity to visit Bangladesh.
[Guest]: It was amazing, the kind of warmth I felt in both places, irrespective of any difference.
[Guest]: Yet what's our policy?
[Guest]: Seal the borders.
[Guest]: In fact, this is exactly why we should completely open the borders.
[Guest]: And for both reasons, for strategic reasons, as well as for social reasons.
[Guest]: Social reasons, we'll build a bond, and for strategic reasons, then we'll have a much
[Guest]: clearer flow of information to know what's happening and who's planning what.
[Guest]: Because we will be there and they will be here.
[Guest]: So everyone, at least those at the decision-making points, would be much more concretely aware
[Guest]: that what is really being planned or proposed as an attack or whatever, and diffuse it much,
[Guest]: much before than otherwise, and there would be no social-political capital to do it.
[Guest]: I mean, there would be social-political capital to diffuse it before, than to raise the social-political
[Guest]: capital after an incident had happened in order to further the divide.
[Guest]: So in both places, I was shocked, you know, because I was really surprised.
[Guest]: I had heard and read about it, like you read in the book, but I had no experience that,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, there are people who are Muslims who are my friends, whom I know, so
[Guest]: I'm not looking at them as others.
[Guest]: But these were countries I went where I hardly knew anybody, you know, I went as a visitor.
[Guest]: And I knew that I'm from India and I knew that our official relationship may not be
[Guest]: what is desired.
[Guest]: And I met a taxi driver in Bangladesh, in Dhaka, who told me that if we open the border,
[Guest]: we could easily go and have this custom of, what do they say, pigeon flying.
[Guest]: Because in that part of Bengal, it seems, there has been a long tradition of pigeon
[Guest]: being sent from villages hundreds of kilometers away to the other side, and it's a kind
[Guest]: of a race and a social custom.
[Guest]: But today it can't be done, it can't be done properly, because the borders are sealed.
[Guest]: I was surprised that this guy has a, I mean, I had not even known, you know, I had read
[Guest]: that there used to be post office pigeons and things of that kind, but that's, you
[Guest]: know, 200 years ago or more.
[Guest]: But this guy was talking about it now, 10 years ago, that for him, that was a priority,
[Guest]: that was his kind of interest.
[Guest]: And if you open the border, he would be able to go easily and have a much freer, open competition
[Guest]: in pigeon flying among people who have that interest on both sides.
[Guest]: You know, so we can't even imagine at what level people are thinking, we can't even
[Guest]: imagine.
[Guest]: So this is where it brings us to our perspective of people, you know, which is where the identity,
[Guest]: population and all this are linked, I believe.
[Guest]: That how do we look at other people?
[Guest]: Do we look at them as people or do we look at them only through the lens that we hold,
[Guest]: because there's no cost attached to it?
[Guest]: And the digital world has made it that much more easier, there's no cost attached to
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: Physically, we'll never do that.
[Guest]: So I think, you know, and one would have expected, which is probably one reason, till 1965 war,
[Guest]: the borders with Pakistan were open, literally.
[Guest]: People could come and go as easily as anybody else.
[Guest]: 1965 changed that.
[Guest]: And since we have only solidified and increased the height and capacity of those walls.
[Guest]: Yet India had an official policy, which was kind of non-aligned, kind of tilted to the
[Guest]: Soviet, etc. as a kind of a geostrategic balance, whereas there were many more Indians who could
[Guest]: go to US and the Western countries than the Soviet Union.
[Guest]: So what social capital was generated because of that interaction.
[Guest]: The government of India may have a policy tilting towards whatever, but given a choice,
[Guest]: most Indian students would prefer to go to the English-speaking world of the West than
[Guest]: to the Soviet Union of that era, right?
[Guest]: Yeah, irrespective of the policy.
[Guest]: Today, we have actually played up this divide.
[Guest]: And which is why I think we have to begin at home.
[Guest]: Every one of us have to figure out how do we interact with people physically in our
[Guest]: own spaces, in our neighborhood, in our markets, with our thelawalas, you know, whoever.
[Guest]: We need to relearn it.
[Guest]: We have forgotten.
[Guest]: We need to relearn.
[Guest]: There's no other way.
[Guest]: We cannot assume, we cannot give this blank space or the blank slate or believe that the
[Guest]: digital technology with its capacity to reach out can help.
[Guest]: Perhaps the algorithms, perhaps whatever it is, it's definitely not helping.
[Guest]: Like Hyde said, the likes button and the retweet buttons are making things different because
[Guest]: we are looking at those counters.
[Guest]: We are not building the relationship, which is why we must, we must, and if you remember
[Guest]: the Deolali meeting, that was one such attempt that urban and rural India, at least some
[Guest]: people, even a fraction of them, could come together to understand what's the perspective
[Guest]: and who's coming from where.
[Guest]: We don't have to win over anybody overnight.
[Guest]: But we can win that trust, we can win, have that inner confidence that the other person
[Guest]: is not there to be at my throat.
[Guest]: And then, of course, we can discuss all the other issues, for instance, you know, all
[Guest]: the talk about farmers getting subsidized.
[Guest]: It's actually the other way around.
[Guest]: It's been so all these years.
[Guest]: It's the farmers who are subsidizing the rest of the population, forget about the transfers.
[Guest]: It is the rural sector, society and economy that is upholding 50% of the population.
[Guest]: Who is subsidizing whom?
[Guest]: 50% of the population is being subsidized by 15% of the GDP.
[Guest]: It's the, you know, it's the, what should I say, it's the broad shoulders of these farmers
[Guest]: who are holding 50% of India's population alive, keeping them alive.
[Amit Varma]: Who's subsidizing whom?
[Amit Varma]: I love this concept of Sharad Joshi ji called negative subsidy to find out what negative
[Amit Varma]: subsidy means.
[Amit Varma]: Listen to episode 86 of my show, you know, and I'd also say that there is in me the hope
[Amit Varma]: that while okay, some of these problems are created by technology, but at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: I think technology is a huge net positive.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe the way forward lies out of this.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, people are listening to you and me have this conversation because
[Amit Varma]: of this technology and because of the internet.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe there's some hope there and I share your experience of Pakistan in the sense I
[Amit Varma]: went there with India's cricket tour in 2006.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember we landed up in Lahore and we had to buy some basic groceries and pencil
[Amit Varma]: cells and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And we went to this nearby store.
[Amit Varma]: And the moment the person realized that we are from India just refused to take money.
[Amit Varma]: And this is almost a cliche.
[Amit Varma]: We thought of it as a cliche we've heard about and we saw it on that first day and again
[Amit Varma]: and again and again all through Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember being in Lahore and thinking that one, it's such a beautifully lit city
[Amit Varma]: at night.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember that the way it's lit up and Indian cities often aren't like that.
[Amit Varma]: But I also remember how much it is like Delhi, you know, Lahore and Delhi are so much closer
[Amit Varma]: together than say Delhi and Chennai, which could be separate countries, right?
[Amit Varma]: Again, it's a cliche Karachi being like Bombay.
[Amit Varma]: But when I was in Karachi, it did kind of feel that way.
[Amit Varma]: And that sense is there among the people like, you know, my friend Pranay Kottasane uses
[Amit Varma]: the phrase, the military jihadi complex for the Pakistani state.
[Amit Varma]: And the important thing to remember is that the Pakistani state or this military jihadi
[Amit Varma]: complex is different from the Pakistani people.
[Amit Varma]: And the Pakistani people are exactly like us, exactly like us, right?
[Amit Varma]: The difference is so minor that you know, the differences between Indian states is far
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Amit Varma]: And so I completely agree that, you know, people to people contact these kind of interactions
[Amit Varma]: are just a huge deal.
[Amit Varma]: And which is why so many of these policies like we, you know, the military, the Pakistani
[Amit Varma]: state and civil society are different things, they're at opposite ends.
[Amit Varma]: And we think that when we stop, say, Pakistani cricketers from playing in the IPL, we think
[Amit Varma]: we are hitting out against the state, but actually we are helping the state, we're hitting
[Guest]: out against civil society.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And that just kind of...
[Guest]: We know technology can surely help, but technology can help only if we have a perspective to
[Guest]: use the technology in that manner.
[Guest]: Maybe it's in the initial phase of technology, these were all new technologies, etc.
[Guest]: I remember I come from a generation where we didn't have emails and how the emails came,
[Guest]: I distinctly remember in the late, in the early 90s, how we had these, you know, yeah,
[Guest]: kind of servers where we could have access only once or twice in a day at night to be
[Guest]: able to connect to the, you know, to the telephone lines that we had, and all that.
[Guest]: So technology can surely help and we have all seen and I'm sure you have too, that how
[Guest]: when the emails first came, groups were formed on the email groups, e-groups, and how they
[Guest]: used to be outbursts, you know, I mean, quite frequent outbursts among people who didn't
[Amit Varma]: know...
[Guest]: You and I have been in groups, yeah, like that, yeah.
[Guest]: But they were kind of limited because those groups could only reach up to, you know, a
[Guest]: certain number 100, 200, whatever.
[Guest]: But now it's completely public.
[Guest]: And we are now fixed, you know, this is where, this is where it reminds me of Gandhi's that
[Guest]: this thing, you know, that burned down everything that he's written.
[Guest]: Forget what he has said in the past.
[Guest]: If you want to find any meaning, think of what he has said on that issue in his latest
[Guest]: this thing.
[Guest]: Because he's evolving.
[Guest]: He's not ashamed of change.
[Guest]: Today, we are ashamed.
[Amit Varma]: We are afraid of change, not even ashamed.
[Guest]: That we will be accused of being hypocrites.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: Whereas that's what is growth all about.
[Guest]: Every day a tree is changing, you know, a tree is growing, new leaves are coming.
[Guest]: Old leaves are falling.
[Guest]: So if we can't change, because we realize that that's necessary, that is what we, I
[Guest]: mean, life is about change.
[Guest]: So what are we afraid of?
[Guest]: So it's not just shame.
[Guest]: I think it's a fear.
[Guest]: To me, it's this fear because we lack fear because we lack that confidence in ourselves.
[Guest]: Which to me, I think I was fortunate.
[Guest]: I was really fortunate.
[Guest]: This is the only thing I think I was lucky apart, you know, I don't think there was anything
[Guest]: particular about my family or anything else.
[Guest]: Many people have gone through exactly the same experience.
[Guest]: The only difference was, as I see it, that I dabbled and ventured into domains that I
[Guest]: had no particular expertise.
[Guest]: I had no expertise.
[Guest]: And therefore, I could ask that why couldn't there be more tigers as there were more chickens?
[Amit Varma]: And that's a feature, not a bug, because no expertise means no dogmas either.
[Guest]: Yeah, correct.
[Guest]: No baggage.
[Guest]: No intellectual baggage.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: We can ask.
[Guest]: We can be wrong.
[Guest]: All species don't breed the same way.
[Guest]: So all species may not be, it may not be possible to do it in the same way.
[Guest]: But it's like all trees don't grow the same way.
[Guest]: All trees grow in different seasons, the flower in different seasons, crops are grown as per
[Guest]: the season.
[Guest]: So there's nothing extraordinary about it.
[Guest]: So you've got to tell it to it.
[Guest]: And which is what is the difference, as you said earlier, between the abstract and the
[Guest]: concrete?
[Guest]: The concrete is always limited.
[Guest]: Abstraction is, you know, the sky is the limit.
[Guest]: It's our imagination.
[Guest]: The challenge I think is, and to me this is a beauty, to me, I really enjoy this, that
[Guest]: how do I reconcile the limitations of the concrete that I face today to the abstractions
[Guest]: of my imagination that I would like to go tomorrow?
[Guest]: How do I reconcile?
[Guest]: I'm always thinking that how do I reconcile the two?
[Guest]: Because I like both.
[Guest]: You know, I like the imagination, the abstract part of it, I like the concrete part of it,
[Guest]: because that's the real world and that's probably my engineering and my, you know, like kind
[Guest]: of concrete details.
[Guest]: So how do I reconcile?
[Guest]: And then I realized something, you know, that what's the difference between, in fact, just
[Guest]: the other day I was talking to another friend, another old friend from our old Ayn Rand groups
[Guest]: who just retired from IIT Delhi, that it's very customary or quite fashionable these
[Guest]: days to say that Newton's laws have been overcome or Einstein proved their limitation and gone
[Guest]: beyond.
[Guest]: But has they?
[Guest]: What is progress?
[Guest]: You know, as Newton himself would say that he stood on the shoulders of giants and so
[Guest]: the current and the later generation stood on the shoulders of Newton and people like
[Guest]: him at that time.
[Guest]: Newton's laws are abstractions.
[Guest]: There can't be an abstraction that is in concrete, because then there is no difference between
[Guest]: abstraction and concrete.
[Guest]: He has idealized the concrete into the form of an abstraction and demonstrated it through
[Guest]: the equation and through all the rest.
[Guest]: So the Newton's laws will continue to hold, irrespective of what the concrete is, but
[Guest]: because the Newton's law is not explaining all the concretes, people will find different
[Guest]: ways to figure out how to explain the new concrete or the new understanding of the concrete.
[Guest]: The material sciences are changing, the electromagnetism, Einstein and all that is the quantum physics,
[Guest]: they will try to explain it in somewhat a little better.
[Guest]: So this gap between abstraction, you know, perhaps because I came from the physical sciences,
[Guest]: this kind of interested me, that how do I understand this gap between what we call the
[Guest]: laws or the principles of physics with actual engineering, which I did, because there was
[Guest]: a huge gap.
[Guest]: There is nothing in engineering that I can apply, where I can apply the laws of physics,
[Guest]: none of the laws, because there will be efficiency losses, there are efficiency losses because
[Guest]: of technological limitation, there are efficiency losses because of economic limitation, there
[Guest]: are efficiency losses because of lack of social awareness about that.
[Guest]: Environment being a very good example, that people are more aware about environment so
[Guest]: they are willing to put in more resources to figure out how to do it and they were trying
[Guest]: to solve it, which wouldn't have been the case 10, 15, 20 years ago.
[Guest]: Yeah, so to me, you know, to pit the two as two poles, I think is completely futile, completely
[Guest]: futile and which is which is something I realized, you know, something you mentioned earlier,
[Unknown]: engineering mindset.
[Guest]: Hike.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's hike.
[Guest]: I, this is the thing that I really find myself lucky that I didn't fall into the dogmatic
[Guest]: trap because I didn't come from any domain expertise and I read that essay of Hike, the
[Guest]: knowledge one, where he actually identifies this problem as an engineering mindset and
[Guest]: everything else seems to follow.
[Guest]: That I can solve the problem and therefore the other person becomes a jigsaw puzzle whom
[Guest]: I can put wherever I want in order to solve the problem.
[Guest]: And I don't, I'm not looking at the other person as an equal at all.
[Amit Varma]: I link this essay of Hike, which is called the use of knowledge and society from the
[Amit Varma]: show notes, which is just the greatest essay of the 20th century and so important, so fundamental.
[Amit Varma]: So please read it.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm going to read out something else now.
[Amit Varma]: And this is sparked by, you know, I have this weird tendency that sometimes someone is speaking
[Amit Varma]: to me and I'll think to myself that, wow, what a beautiful sentence.
[Amit Varma]: And a little while back, you said that every day a tree is changing and it's such a lovely
[Amit Varma]: sentence and it reminded me of this poem by Philip Larkin called The Trees.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll just read that out for my listeners.
[Guest]: Have you read it?
[Amit Varma]: I think I have, but I don't remember it now.
[Amit Varma]: I'll read it out.
[Amit Varma]: The trees by Philip Larkin.
[Amit Varma]: The trees are coming into leaf, like something almost being said.
[Amit Varma]: The recent buds relax and spread, their greenness is a kind of grief.
[Amit Varma]: Is it that they are born again and we grow old?
[Amit Varma]: No, they die too.
[Amit Varma]: Their yearly trick of looking new is written down in rings of grain.
[Amit Varma]: And still the unresting castles thresh in full-grown thickness every May.
[Amit Varma]: Last year is dead, they seem to say, begin afresh, afresh, afresh.
[Amit Varma]: And I love the phrase in this, like something almost being said, you know, trees coming
[Amit Varma]: into leaf, just very beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to what you and I have spoken a lot about and argued about, which is Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: I find him fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: I, you know, I did a two episode special on Gandhi with Ramchandra Guha.
[Amit Varma]: I've just read a bunch of books.
[Amit Varma]: You can't read all his collected writings because there are a hundred volumes.
[Amit Varma]: So they are all online.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, one should dip into them from time to time.
[Amit Varma]: Just a fascinating, incredible man, one of those great figures of history and one who
[Amit Varma]: also contained multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't want to go into detail with all my criticisms of him or all my praise for
[Amit Varma]: him or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But over the years, increasingly, I find you talking more and more of Gandhi and what you
[Amit Varma]: have learned from him and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about your perception of Gandhi, like, you know, when we grow up
[Amit Varma]: in India, there's always this notion, you know, it's always Mahatma Gandhi, not Mohandas
[Amit Varma]: Karamchand Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: The Mohandas to me is as interesting as Mahatma, but it's always Mahatma Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: And there's always that iconic figure of that old man wearing just one piece of cloth and
[Amit Varma]: all of that in his old age.
[Amit Varma]: But you read more about him and it becomes kind of richer and richer and you see the
[Amit Varma]: limitations and you see the greatness.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about your love affair, as it were, with.
[Guest]: Yeah, because as an engineer, perhaps at the back of my mind, I was looking for practical
[Guest]: ways to go beyond the intellectualization that I had been trapped into or had opted
[Guest]: for for the first 25 years of my life.
[Guest]: I mean, of the policy activism, advocacy, etc.
[Guest]: And there's so limited, so few successes that I can count on.
[Guest]: Not just successes because of me, but any kind of success.
[Guest]: So my thing was that, how do we look at politics?
[Guest]: Because we particularly, I mean, perhaps more in your generation perhaps than mine, because
[Guest]: I grew up during emergency, there was still an idealism about politics and change and
[Guest]: the possibilities of politics.
[Guest]: And that has clearly evaporated, like my own family experience shows from my father's experience
[Guest]: in the late 60s.
[Guest]: So that has clearly evaporated.
[Guest]: Now, therefore, the question is, what is politics?
[Guest]: Is it about politicizing an issue and therefore an instrument to go to battle with the other?
[Guest]: Or is the essence of politics precisely as a platform to reconcile the differences that
[Guest]: might arise in society?
[Guest]: And therefore, if you look at it this way, then you find that the politics is starting
[Guest]: from everyone's home.
[Guest]: Every family has to kind of politically decide what's the priority to be given.
[Guest]: Should you go for a movie to celebrate a birthday or should you have a pizza to celebrate a
[Guest]: birthday?
[Guest]: You know, we are constantly negotiating and figuring out how to balance.
[Guest]: That's politics.
[Guest]: That's the purpose of politics, right?
[Guest]: And that kind of, you know, one kind of a breakthrough for me was when Gandhi in his
[Guest]: autobiography talks of politics as his way to moksha, to meet his maker, which, you know,
[Guest]: that means he was idealizing it to his conception of an ideal to the ultimate extent possible.
[Guest]: That here was a practical man, you know, a completely down-to-earth man.
[Guest]: He was not a theoretician.
[Guest]: He hadn't written any of the books on philosophy as such.
[Guest]: All of his letters and things were all on practical issues that he was grappling with,
[Guest]: with all their complexities.
[Guest]: Yet he was projecting or aspiring to try to have a kind of politics that would reconcile,
[Guest]: that is, go back to politics to its essence, to its original.
[Guest]: That is, politics is a platform to reconcile differences, not to flag it.
[Guest]: Because if you flag it, then it is, you know, like we have another saying that war is politics
[Guest]: by another means.
[Guest]: So we are at it now, virtually or literally.
[Guest]: Therefore, to me, that was kind of reignited and which actually made me think about my
[Guest]: father's experience, that he could have been killed.
[Guest]: You know, I hadn't thought about this in the 20 years since he told me.
[Guest]: He is dead now almost 10 years.
[Guest]: But it has come back in my mind because of this, that that is what politics was.
[Guest]: So Gandhi underscored the relevance of politics in a manner I believe no one else has.
[Guest]: No one else of the contemporaries or of the last century had put into practice a kind
[Guest]: of politics that was incredible and he could do it because he could connect.
[Guest]: And he figured out how do I connect to me and which is what, you know, which kind of
[Guest]: and the other thing that kind of brought me to it is because another one whom I probably
[Guest]: not talked of as much, but whom I almost listen every day is Tagore.
[Guest]: Being a Bengali, Rabindra Sangeet comes naturally to, I don't sing, but I love to listen.
[Amit Varma]: You look like him also right now with your flowing white beard.
[Guest]: Yeah, this is probably temporary, but yeah.
[Guest]: So I found that he was a man, Tagore, who was so far ahead of his time.
[Guest]: We are still grappling to understand how far he had been able to go.
[Guest]: And like Atlas Shrug kind of had a major impact in my way of thinking, his novel, apart from
[Guest]: his poetry, because poetry, it would be all Bengalis, but his novel, which is accessible
[Guest]: to all, one of his novels is perhaps the major political novel or the second one is Gora.
[Guest]: You know, not the Home and the World, you know, which is well known, but Gora.
[Guest]: Because it's amazing that what he depicted 125 years ago in that story, in the condition
[Guest]: in which Bengal at that time in that great foment was, is amazing.
[Guest]: And how he sought to break out or break down the boundaries.
[Guest]: And he was trying to do it within his own community, that is the Brahmo, you know, because
[Guest]: that was another sect he was born into and therefore he was probably much more familiar
[Guest]: with it.
[Guest]: He was trying to break it in his own.
[Guest]: And this I saw reflected in the real, what should I say, discourse between Gandhi and
[Guest]: Tagore on the issue of that earthquake or on the issue of Charkha and the rest, you
[Guest]: know, the Swadeshi and yeah.
[Guest]: That two people were looking at it quite differently, clearly.
[Guest]: I mean, they probably looked at it through their own perspectives, in their own context.
[Guest]: But what to me was interesting was that that didn't create identities.
[Guest]: That discourse actually made their bonds even stronger.
[Guest]: So that when Tagore was nearing the end of his life, he sought to hand over the board
[Guest]: of Shantiniketan to someone like Gandhi, that you be on the board to continue the legacy.
[Guest]: This is exactly the same when Subhash Bose, whom we hear so much, Gandhi and Bose, Bose
[Guest]: named one of his brigades on Gandhi and Nehru.
[Guest]: You know, we hear all the differences.
[Guest]: This is in the last phase of Bose's life, last two, three years, that it is this man
[Guest]: who called Gandhi the father of the nation, the Bapu, yeah.
[Guest]: So we have so much of instances we can pick on to figure out how people are reconciled.
[Guest]: And they were reconciled not because they had a new realization.
[Guest]: They were reconciled because they had their bond from before.
[Guest]: You know, so that relationship ensured that no matter their policy differences, political
[Guest]: differences, they would still have a lever or a thread to connect.
[Guest]: Because I can't think how such major differences as we seem to think they are today, were overcome
[Guest]: so easily, so graciously, so amazingly, as these.
[Guest]: So the differences don't matter if you have the relationship, which is what we need to
[Guest]: collect.
[Guest]: Each one of us need to be able to make the relationship with our communities, which was
[Guest]: a challenge with mobility itself, I mean, which is a challenge every time.
[Guest]: Ambedkar warned about the problems of community in rural India, I mean, which is precisely
[Guest]: a very similar kind of a challenge in another way perhaps.
[Guest]: The same with the complete lack of community in ultra-mobile urban India, where in an apartment
[Guest]: most neighbours may not know each other.
[Guest]: So we need to figure out how to break that.
[Guest]: How do we break that?
[Guest]: Whether technology helps, well, I welcome it, but it has to be technology neutral because
[Guest]: you know, no technology cuts both ways, nuclear energy, nuclear bomb.
[Guest]: So technology would just be a tool in how we use it, how we think about it.
[Guest]: We really need to figure out how do we break that.
[Guest]: So in that sense, Gandhi to me as a practitioner showed me how something that was kind of in
[Guest]: my mind, I had not kind of thought of it as concrete, made me make that shift.
[Guest]: I mean, Tagore spoke about it, wrote about it, but those were abstracts, you know, that's
[Guest]: a novel, after all, it's a novel, but Gandhi put it into practice.
[Guest]: So I had an aunt who went to Nuwakhali with Gandhi, you know, at the height of all that.
[Guest]: And I heard the story not from the aunt, but from her husband, who was a doctor, a British
[Guest]: army doctor.
[Guest]: He used to tell me that he told only one thing, that death before honour.
[Guest]: So I had not understood what does it mean, you know, that he would always say that, that
[Guest]: I told her that death before honour, that you are fine, you are free to go with Gandhi,
[Guest]: but should any harm come to you, you should opt for death, then your honour.
[Guest]: Now that was a risk, which was obvious risk, which was an enormous risk, that a young girl
[Guest]: like my aunt at that time in 1946 took, like many others, to be part of Gandhi's journey
[Guest]: through Manuvakhali.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: To be able to rebuild the literal connection, the physical connection, which was getting
[Guest]: broken by the abstraction of the partition and the borders and the Hindu-Muslim and all
[Guest]: the rest.
[Guest]: Which is why, you know, a book that kind of really amazes me and when I read it, it kind
[Guest]: of, I mean, still brings tears to my eyes, even though I didn't experience it myself,
[Guest]: is The Miracle of Calcutta.
[Guest]: You know, which Gandhi did and people, my grandfather, grandmother, I haven't seen
[Guest]: my grandfather, and my parents, would tell me how parts of Calcutta, including our own
[Guest]: where we are, had bodies outside on the streets.
[Guest]: Much more gross than what the Naxalite violence could, you know, because that was just a bullet
[Guest]: and in some far out forest most of the time or in the prison.
[Guest]: Most people wouldn't see it, but they saw it and saw the transformation.
[Guest]: Because Gandhi had built that bond that could connect and therefore people could figure
[Guest]: out a way to overcome.
[Guest]: You know, we need to build that bond.
[Guest]: So we can't expect a Gandhi to save us because Gandhi was not born.
[Guest]: And even in a literal way, we can't expect a Gandhi to save us.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Even in a literal way.
[Guest]: So we have to figure out how somebody, anyone, any one of us, anybody, what lessons can we
[Guest]: draw so that we try to avoid some of the horrors that might haunt us again.
[Guest]: And it's a very realistic horror.
[Guest]: It's a very realistic horror and because of the technology and the advances, like I think
[Guest]: you mentioned in one of your episodes sometimes, I think, you know, the Rwanda radios.
[Guest]: You know, that what kind of horror it was caused 20-30 years ago just by an old technology.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So it can cause...
[Guest]: So we have to be really, really conscious of the possibilities and therefore the alternative,
[Guest]: that there is an alternative possible.
[Guest]: And therefore, and Gandhi showed me this alternative in a concrete sense, in a way which my engineering
[Guest]: mind could grasp much more concretely than the abstractions that I would have read from
[Guest]: Hayek or Rand or Tagore or anybody else.
[Guest]: So Julian Simon was that, but Julian Simon was concrete in a very narrow sense.
[Guest]: You know, the environment and the relation to economics, etc.
[Guest]: But Gandhi was all-encompassing and which is why I don't like to refer to Gandhi as
[Guest]: the Mahatma or the Bapu or the father of the nation and all that because that only puts
[Guest]: a distance between us.
[Guest]: I don't want him to be on a pedestal.
[Guest]: I would not have approached Gandhi in this manner had I looked at him on the pedestal.
[Guest]: I am looking at him as somebody I can argue, debate with and which I find, you know, which
[Guest]: you find, not just me, I think everyone finds that when we go back to, you know, which is
[Guest]: classically true for the epics, the reason epics survive in every culture is because
[Guest]: they have a new meaning for every generation.
[Guest]: You know, otherwise there is no reason epics would survive, whether it's Greek ones or
[Guest]: Indian ones.
[Guest]: There are books that survive and outlive precisely because of that.
[Guest]: You know, people reinvent the meanings in it and that's nothing, that's completely
[Guest]: natural because that's part of our growing, part of our, you know, the life is about change.
[Guest]: So those are the ways we change.
[Guest]: So we read a book and think that's done and dusted, it's not, if it's done and dusted
[Guest]: then it was not a book that was really worth looking at it or reading it more than once.
[Guest]: But the books that are ideas that survive are never done and dusted, never done and
[Guest]: dusted because you can find new meanings into it, which happens to me whenever I read Gora
[Guest]: or whenever I read Rana or whenever I read Gandhi, that there's a new angle that I find
[Guest]: and I look at them precisely because I have no dogma.
[Guest]: I really don't have any dogma.
[Guest]: I was not born into a Gandhian belief, like I was not born into a Tagorean belief, although
[Guest]: partly because Calcutta and Bengal, Tagore is looming large, very large in our cultural
[Guest]: space or mental space.
[Guest]: But it's not because of dogma because I could, you know, I've not spent, since 1976, I've
[Guest]: not spent perhaps a year at a stretch in Calcutta.
[Guest]: It's been a long time since I left, I passed my high school.
[Guest]: I've studied outside, I've worked mostly outside, Calcutta has been a home and a visit.
[Guest]: But I can still relate one, perhaps because the language which I did learn in my primary,
[Guest]: so that's my mother tongues and I'm really proud that I can read two languages and I
[Guest]: envy my wife who can manage, who can speak three, four, five languages in that sense
[Guest]: because I think multiple languages give us that extra enrichment, extra words and, you
[Guest]: know, emotions that you can't connect maybe in one language.
[Guest]: And this actually, you know, made me think another thing that I recently heard or this
[Guest]: thing that is there something about monotheism that creates or that facilitates formation
[Guest]: of identities that much more quickly because it's mono, that is the truth and that is the
[Guest]: only truth and therefore the identity is there to defend that truth.
[Guest]: And there is also a book.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Whereas the polytheism of Hinduism is probably the reason why I can't think of any past,
[Guest]: you know, any past war or what should I say, invasion of India where it was primarily because
[Guest]: of religion.
[Guest]: Religion came, rode on whatever they rode on.
[Guest]: It was not religion.
[Guest]: It was just power.
[Guest]: Mohammed Ghori was invited into India to defeat another guy who was as Indian as anybody else.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, it was not, it was always power.
[Guest]: Siraj-ud-Daulah lost the war because somebody else bought somebody else from his side.
[Guest]: And if you look at it, isn't it amazing that three major, of the four major wars that the
[Guest]: British fought, you know, the game-changing wars which happened literally in a day and
[Guest]: changed history, Siraj-ud-Daulah in 1757, Tipu, 1799, 1857.
[Guest]: In between, there was the Maratha War.
[Guest]: Who were fighting whom?
[Guest]: You know, the crown didn't have even 100,000, you know, at its peak, the British Empire
[Guest]: had 1,00,000 Englishmen or British or European in India.
[Guest]: Who was fighting whom?
[Guest]: You know, they were all typical political struggles where politics had broken down and
[Guest]: war was, if politics breaks down, then the war is another form of politics.
[Guest]: So, we really, I think, I think there is enormous capacity to reimagine because the blinkers
[Guest]: are our own.
[Guest]: Blinkers are our own.
[Guest]: If we can just let our imagination fly, we might go here and there and everywhere, but
[Guest]: we might find something much more meaningful.
[Guest]: I think that's why change to me is something that we need to be able to absorb and accept.
[Guest]: And monotheism, I am very fortunate that we are in a polytheistic society culture where
[Guest]: truth are numerous from the beginning, from the origin.
[Guest]: There is no one truth and that's what all the books, the Upanishads and the Gita, that's
[Guest]: what they do.
[Guest]: A debate, a constant dialogue to figure out what is the truth, how to get there.
[Guest]: There is no assurance and the gap that you said earlier, that all the duplicities that
[Guest]: happen in war, that's the concrete.
[Guest]: That is exactly the lack of efficiency, the gulf between laws of physics or the principles
[Guest]: of physics and actual application in engineering.
[Guest]: So I'm not surprised by those gulfs.
[Guest]: Those gulfs would be inevitably necessary because otherwise there's no way to go because
[Guest]: you're concrete and otherwise you'll have to say that the concrete and the abstractions
[Guest]: are the same.
[Guest]: That can perhaps happen only when we are in that singularity where shunya has the potential
[Guest]: to be everything.
[Guest]: So it's a complete abstraction of that kind where the abstraction and the concrete would
[Guest]: be all merged into one.
[Guest]: Other than that, where would you merge it?
[Guest]: I think that's huge, which is why I, as I said, I have not entered a temple for any
[Guest]: religious purpose and most often for any purpose for decades now.
[Guest]: The last time I remember, I went to this Akshardham that had just come up and some relatives wanted
[Guest]: to visit.
[Guest]: I couldn't enter that temple.
[Guest]: But that had another reason.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because 20 years ago, that area was a slum, 30 years ago.
[Guest]: Those guys' temple manufactured a claim because their guru was supposed to have sat
[Guest]: on that and seen the Yamuna to build it.
[Guest]: Therefore, the slum was moved away.
[Guest]: And so I'm very glad.
[Guest]: So I couldn't, I just couldn't, I thought this is something I cannot participate, buy
[Guest]: the ticket and enter a place where I'll not be able to associate, identify at all for
[Guest]: this practical reason, forget the religious beliefs.
[Guest]: And then I'm very glad that somebody else could figure out how to build that, that another
[Guest]: kind of, you know, the Asian Games Village 2010 in front of that temple.
[Guest]: So that the Yamuna is now far away.
[Guest]: We can't do that.
[Guest]: We really must figure out how do we connect in a manner that will be completely secular.
[Guest]: Secular not in the political policy sense.
[Guest]: Secular in terms of the thinking sense that it doesn't matter what your beliefs are.
[Guest]: We can still deal with each other.
[Guest]: And deal with each other very productively, very fruitfully.
[Guest]: Because there is no reason why our beliefs should clash just like laws of physics doesn't
[Guest]: clash with engineering.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of observations and the second one, I guess, leading to a question of sorts
[Amit Varma]: and the first observation is that, yeah, I mean, one way I think of Hinduism is kind
[Amit Varma]: of as an open source religion.
[Amit Varma]: Like I was chatting with my host in Delhi, our mutual friend Mohit yesterday or today
[Amit Varma]: morning, in fact, before I came for this recording.
[Amit Varma]: And he was looking at this book called On Lakshmi, on the Goddess Lakshmi by Devdutt
[Amit Varma]: Patnaik.
[Amit Varma]: And he showed me an image in that.
[Amit Varma]: And in that image, Lakshmi is sort of kneeling at the feet of Vishnu.
[Amit Varma]: And he said that he found that image very interesting because for him, it meant that
[Amit Varma]: wealth should be used in the service of preservation, which is an interesting interpretation.
[Amit Varma]: And I, of course, being my cynical self, told Mohit that you can make any interpretation
[Amit Varma]: out of anything because millions of images, millions of gods.
[Amit Varma]: But it's interesting that you have a religion with that openness, which is kind of open
[Amit Varma]: source that you can, you know, bring the concerns of the present times into it.
[Amit Varma]: And what fills me with a lot of dismay, I am also, of course, a non-believer, but born
[Amit Varma]: a Hindu.
[Amit Varma]: But what also fills me with dismay is that what we have in this political movement called
[Amit Varma]: Hindutva over the last hundred years is an effort in a sense, explicitly or implicitly,
[Amit Varma]: to homogenize Hinduism into one particular strand, a Brahmanical strand, in fact, a later
[Amit Varma]: Brahmanical strand.
[Amit Varma]: Like someone on Twitter just pointed out today, I forget who, that, you know, to think of
[Amit Varma]: vegetarianism and Hinduism as Brahmanical is wrong.
[Amit Varma]: It's actually later Brahmanical, because if you look at the Vedas, they're killing and
[Amit Varma]: eating animals.
[Amit Varma]: Including cows.
[Amit Varma]: And this sort of homogenization of Hinduism into this one fixed thing, does it such a
[Amit Varma]: disservice?
[Amit Varma]: Like, I would say in a sense, if a Hindu is in danger, it is because of Hindutva.
[Amit Varma]: Because it is reducing it down.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, non-believers like you and me could still possibly call ourselves Hindus.
[Amit Varma]: I know you do.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, and because there's so much else other than all of this.
[Guest]: It's actually a copycat, that this Hindutva is a product of one of the exports or the
[Guest]: imports from the Western nationalism, that religious nationalism that came in.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So this is exactly a copycat.
[Guest]: It's a complete, I mean, what should I say, destruction of anything to do with the ideas
[Guest]: of Hinduism that I would associate with.
[Guest]: And I have no conflict.
[Guest]: You know, just like I have no conflict with laws of physics, I have no conflict.
[Guest]: I don't see any such conflict.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I want to go back to Gandhi, reading about Gandhi, one of the things that strikes
[Amit Varma]: you like a black swan event for various reasons within the Indian freedom movement.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the ways in which he differs from everyone else is in his intellectual development.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, Naipaul once referred to Gandhi as, quote, the least Indian of Indian leaders,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And all his early influences are from elsewhere, you know, learns about nonviolent non-cooperation
[Amit Varma]: through Tolstoy's writing.
[Amit Varma]: You know, he later finds validation of that in Thoreau, he, you know, looks at the Sermon
[Amit Varma]: on the Mount as an inspiration, his distrust of machinery and the idealization of village
[Amit Varma]: life come from John Ruskin.
[Amit Varma]: All these influences are later, later he claims of Bhagavad Gita as an influence.
[Amit Varma]: But to me, in a sense, it seems like a post facto thing.
[Amit Varma]: And his intellectual development is not so much from reading books like all the other
[Amit Varma]: great liberals or Gokhale's and the Ferocia Mehta's and Agarkar's and Ranade's and all of those.
[Amit Varma]: They read widely, you know, they read the great, you know, Mill and Bentham and the
[Amit Varma]: great liberal writers of the age, Adam Smith, they were steeped in the enlightenment to
[Amit Varma]: a certain extent, and he wasn't.
[Amit Varma]: And this led him to a lot of strange ideas, like, for example, and I once asked Ram Guha
[Amit Varma]: about this, and I found his answer lovely, and I'll share it with you.
[Amit Varma]: And I read out bits from his book Hind Swaraj, which of course, he wrote in 1911, 1912, when
[Amit Varma]: he was on the ship back from South Africa to India, where he railed against, say, the
[Amit Varma]: railways.
[Amit Varma]: So for example, at one point, he said, quote, railways, lawyers and doctors have impoverished
[Amit Varma]: the country so much that if we don't wake up in time, we should be ruined, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: In another place, he said that, quote, it is beyond dispute that railways propagate
[Amit Varma]: evil, quote.
[Amit Varma]: And he was against modern medicine, though, when he fell ill, he always took modern medicine,
[Amit Varma]: but he railed against it.
[Amit Varma]: He railed against lawyers, and all of that seemed to be completely against modernity.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, so much so that when he came to India, and he shared his ideas with his
[Amit Varma]: great hero, Gokhale, Gokhale actually told him that, boss, you're a little out of touch.
[Amit Varma]: So don't enter politics actively now, you go around India for a year, see the country
[Amit Varma]: for yourself, and only then enter.
[Amit Varma]: And Gokhale died shortly afterwards, and Gandhi's bizarre response to that was to continue his
[Amit Varma]: journey around the country quite correctly, but barefoot, because he thought that would
[Amit Varma]: be a tribute to Gokhale.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, at a later point, there's this beautiful book called the Mahatma and the
[Amit Varma]: Poet, which has those correspondence of Gandhi and Tagore.
[Amit Varma]: And you see at points, you can sense that Tagore is also a little bit exasperated and
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, gently chiding him and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just a lovely exchange.
[Amit Varma]: So I asked Ram, when I spoke to him about Gandhi, after his biography was out, that
[Amit Varma]: what do we make of this?
[Amit Varma]: Like, I understand people are evolving.
[Amit Varma]: But he wrote Hind Swaraj when he was in his 40s, mid 40s, you know, you'd expect a person
[Amit Varma]: to have evolved beyond that stage.
[Amit Varma]: And yet his ideas are very simplistic and muddy on these subjects.
[Amit Varma]: But on a subject like Satyagraha, on certain subjects, his words are incredible.
[Amit Varma]: They're inspiring, they're incredible, they contain deep truth.
[Amit Varma]: Why is that?
[Amit Varma]: And Ram's answer, which I know you'll agree with, was that when he experienced something,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that deep knowledge he gained from experiencing it, from being a practitioner,
[Amit Varma]: as you put it, brought great wisdom and great insight.
[Amit Varma]: But when he hadn't experienced something and he knew it only in the abstract, you know,
[Amit Varma]: like the good that railways can do or modern medicine, then he would rail against it and
[Amit Varma]: you don't take his view seriously.
[Amit Varma]: And to some extent, I guess at the end of his life, Gandhi must have figured this himself
[Amit Varma]: and he said, burn all my books, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, I'm rambling a bit, but it seems here that there are different ways of arriving
[Amit Varma]: at views of the world.
[Amit Varma]: And one way is ivory tower intellectuals, we read our books, we get our ideas.
[Amit Varma]: The other is from the grassroots bottom up way, like the farmers you and I met in Deolali.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps there is a mix of the two.
[Amit Varma]: Perhaps people like me, people like you have certainly gone into that India.
[Amit Varma]: And people like them also are very well read and they kind of find validation of their
[Amit Varma]: lived experiences in these big ideas.
[Amit Varma]: But Gandhi's way is very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: He's learning kind of by immersing himself into doing things and it almost seems an accident
[Amit Varma]: what emerges.
[Amit Varma]: Like all his satyagrahas, basically, if you look at the proximate aims, they kind of failed.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the last South Africa one had like a face saver kind of half success, but they
[Amit Varma]: all kind of failed in their proximate aims.
[Amit Varma]: The salt tax remained till 1946, the salt tax today is much higher.
[Amit Varma]: So they all failed.
[Amit Varma]: But what they succeeded in was by mobilizing the public imagination, by turning what was
[Amit Varma]: a movement of elites into a movement that was a mass movement.
[Amit Varma]: And you and I have discussed this before.
[Amit Varma]: And I think it's kind of accidental and it's he got lucky.
[Amit Varma]: And it's only in hindsight that we attribute political genius to it that, you know, this
[Amit Varma]: was his vision and he made it happen and we put a teleological plan to it.
[Amit Varma]: And it's actually irrelevant, which of us is correct on this one point, it's completely
[Amit Varma]: irrelevant.
[Amit Varma]: He did what he did.
[Amit Varma]: And it was kind of incredible.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your thoughts on what I just said?
[Guest]: We need a few sessions to discuss Gandhi for the reason that I'm not a Gandhi scholar.
[Guest]: So I am relating to Gandhi through my own experiences, just like Gandhi evolved through
[Guest]: his own experiences.
[Guest]: So I'm kind of secondhand, but at least through him.
[Guest]: So I mean, if I understand Gandhi, he literally believed in detached action.
[Guest]: He created in his own life a kind of detachment, which we can only dream of, you know, so many
[Guest]: of us, we try, we know so many bad things in us.
[Guest]: We want to rectify it, you know, smoking or this, that or the other.
[Guest]: What a struggle.
[Guest]: Many of us give up and try again, some of us succeed, some of us don't.
[Guest]: And that's true in very many aspects.
[Guest]: And so it was with Gandhi.
[Guest]: Yet once he set the goal, the focus was not on the goal at all.
[Guest]: So the salt tax was not the goal at all, neither was India's independence.
[Guest]: His transformation was that he crafted the identity of Indians as citizens, which hadn't
[Guest]: happened then, before, which hasn't happened since.
[Guest]: I mean, an amazing transformation that a society that lived without a state, literally, Indians,
[Guest]: you know, Indians didn't depend on a state protection to remain Indians.
[Guest]: The civilization of India survived for all these years, for the various factors that
[Guest]: they were, but, and people can still relate to some common element, they can share the
[Guest]: epics, etc., etc., but there was no political anchor to it.
[Guest]: So here is a civilization that never in its history relied on a political anchor.
[Guest]: Gandhi had this amazing challenge, incredible challenge, that to create a political identity,
[Guest]: yet go far beyond that identity, which is why he was a nationalist leader, perhaps the
[Guest]: only one I can think of, who didn't need history to justify himself.
[Guest]: You know, do the right thing, exactly as the Gita would say, that figure out what's the
[Guest]: right thing, stick to it, forget the goal, the goal would happen in its own due course
[Guest]: because you don't have all the control over, you are not God.
[Guest]: So you won't be able to deliver the goal as such if you claim it.
[Guest]: So do, figure out what's the right thing to do, figure out how to do it, go about doing
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: Which is why it led to such amazing experiences for Gandhi and he kept evolving.
[Guest]: To me, it is this process that I find fascinating.
[Guest]: Very few authors, including Rand, would acknowledge that evolution, Tagore did.
[Guest]: Amazing!
[Guest]: So to me, that correspondence is not about the conflict that they had in terms of ideology
[Guest]: or ideas or principles or philosophy.
[Guest]: It is that they were struggling, grappling, just like Krishna was trying to grapple or
[Guest]: Arjuna was trying to grapple with Krishna and Krishna was trying to explain to Arjuna.
[Guest]: You know, so to me, it is this process of engagement that is the most exciting part.
[Guest]: To me, if you and I agree, we would have nothing to discuss.
[Guest]: We would only discuss whom to bash up because that's the guy I don't agree on or we don't
[Guest]: agree on.
[Guest]: You know, literally or metaphorically, whichever way we think of how to gang up against other
[Guest]: guy.
[Guest]: But we can discuss precisely because there are threads, nuances that we are exploring.
[Guest]: So I have no this thing about you disproving me because if you do, I'll thank you because
[Guest]: it will give me a new insight into something that may not have come to me.
[Guest]: And if you don't, that only reinforces by this thing that, okay, I'm on a right track
[Guest]: and I presume that would be the same with you.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So it is this process.
[Guest]: This is the means.
[Guest]: To me, this is the means.
[Guest]: There is no other.
[Guest]: The ends are irrelevant.
[Guest]: Irrelevant in the sense that you can set it, wherever you are headed, but that's irrelevant.
[Guest]: Which is why we cannot, you know, I mean, ends are necessary or it creates the drama.
[Guest]: It creates the effect that had it not been for the salt tax and the salt movement, would
[Guest]: millions have kind of gelled into such a movement?
[Guest]: You know, so I'm sure the events do play a significant role, but they're not the whole
[Guest]: story.
[Guest]: They're only the starting point.
[Guest]: They only help to set in motion a process which we should all aspire for.
[Guest]: You know, so Gandhi and Tagore, and Tagore was of course much more of an intellectual,
[Guest]: although he tried to be a practitioner in terms of his Shantiniketan efforts and all
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: But Gandhi was a practitioner through and through, which is perhaps why I relate with
[Guest]: him as an engineer, you know, even conceptually.
[Guest]: That I'm looking at a problem as to how do, if this is a problem I'm facing, how do I
[Guest]: come across and how do I, what do I take away?
[Guest]: How do I improve upon it, et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest]: He was constantly doing that.
[Guest]: He was a practitioner.
[Guest]: So I have no problem that he has differences with the philosophers and the principles,
[Guest]: because those philosophers and the principles had a fraction of a reach in terms of how
[Guest]: he connected.
[Guest]: That's the practice.
[Guest]: Tagore also did the same, but of course, much more intellectually, I mean, Tagore is much
[Guest]: more intellectual.
[Guest]: So to me, it is that both of them acknowledge this process of evolution, whereas what we
[Guest]: have created today is that we want our icons to be born icons.
[Guest]: I think it'll be a dead end.
[Guest]: I think it'll be a disaster.
[Guest]: We'll all turn into fossils and rocks if we are born into what we are.
[Amit Varma]: We will turn into fossils anyway, but for a while.
[Guest]: For a while.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: At least you'll pass on the gene to the next one.
[Guest]: So I think, I think to me, it is this process, which is why the poem that you read, you know,
[Guest]: is the rebirth and the freshness of it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: That's what makes life interesting.
[Guest]: Otherwise we are all gone.
[Guest]: You know, this actually, you know, to me, one way of, I mean, one thing that kind of
[Guest]: fascinated me and I was telling some other friend just a few days ago, why don't we look
[Guest]: at the sky?
[Guest]: One is the pollution and all the rest, many of us in urban India can't.
[Guest]: But look at the sky, the enormity of space and the insignificance of our tiny battles.
[Guest]: You know, I really think we'd be a very enriched society if, if astronomy or things of that
[Guest]: kind were built in as part of our education system.
[Guest]: Look at the sky.
[Guest]: Amazing.
[Guest]: You know, whether you think of it created by a creator or not, I don't think it was
[Guest]: a creator.
[Guest]: You think it's a creator?
[Guest]: That's fine.
[Guest]: That debate won't get resolved immediately.
[Guest]: But that difference would not, should not lead to the other differences in the practical
[Guest]: world.
[Guest]: Because the practical world differences are not because of that difference, which is why
[Guest]: you know, the thing that kind of, another from Gandhi's own life, thing that made me
[Guest]: completely rethink Gandhi was when I began to, at least in my perspective, when I began
[Guest]: to ask how and why did Gandhi change from God is truth, he was a believer from his beginning
[Guest]: and it's not true that Gandhi was only influenced by the West, the philosophers of Tolstoy and
[Guest]: Thoreau and things like that, his Jain and his Vaishnav teachings in India, which was
[Guest]: predating his, played a huge role in terms of what he was.
[Guest]: But how a man who hardly ever went into a temple, yet claimed to be spiritual and prayed
[Guest]: every day, twice a day at least, shifted from God is truth to truth is God.
[Guest]: To me, this was an eye-opener and which actually made me realise or accept as of now at least
[Guest]: that I have no conflict with Hinduism.
[Guest]: Even though I'm a non-believer, I'm a non-practitioner, I have no beliefs, I have no customs that
[Guest]: I would follow.
[Guest]: The only time I would follow custom is only because the family and the society around
[Guest]: me wants me to adopt a particular one.
[Guest]: I don't want a confrontation on that because that's a practical thing, that's not a
[Guest]: principled issue.
[Guest]: I have no prohibition.
[Guest]: To me, this was the starting point of understanding why.
[Guest]: That if you say God is truth, then firstly you'll have to believe that there is a God
[Guest]: and then there is a question of whose God, which God, you know, Shiva or Vishnu or the
[Guest]: Christ or Mohammed or the flying spaghetti monster.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, you have to debate all that.
[Guest]: But truth is God is that process transition from the end, where you are giving the end
[Guest]: and saying that truth is a way to God, you are now reversing it.
[Guest]: You know, you don't have the end.
[Guest]: You have the truth and then it leads to wherever the end is God, no matter what that thing
[Guest]: might be.
[Guest]: And I believe this actually can help us understand why Gandhi said many of his anti-technology
[Guest]: things and why he said it.
[Guest]: Because as a practitioner, we must always look at the context in which he is saying
[Guest]: or doing things.
[Guest]: His is not a theoretical journey.
[Guest]: He is not looking for a beautiful theoretical construct that physicists and mathematicians
[Guest]: look for, you know, symmetry and beauty and all the rest.
[Guest]: He was not looking at all that.
[Guest]: He was looking at hard ground realities, which meant that this transition enabled him to
[Guest]: relate to scientists, relate to philosophers, relate to atheists and relate to believers
[Guest]: without
[Guest]: Have you ever seen a picture of Gandhi entering a temple or sitting before a deity?
[Guest]: And of course, one section of Hindutva Brigade disowned him, which is how he got killed or
[Amit Varma]: murdered.
[Amit Varma]: But he was close to another section.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, he defended the Varna system at a different point in time.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So, that's the part of the evolution.
[Guest]: That's the part of the evolution.
[Guest]: That we need to
[Guest]: Which is why, you know, otherwise we are expecting Gandhi to be born a Mahatma, which is the
[Guest]: one reason why he said that discard Mahatma.
[Guest]: In fact, that was one of his absolute rules in his ashrams, that no one should refer to
[Guest]: him as a Mahatma.
[Guest]: So, that's why I don't look at Gandhi as a Mahatma, Bapu, father of the nation or
[Guest]: anything of that kind.
[Guest]: I look at him as a person who actually lived in flesh and blood and who actually tried
[Guest]: to do things in practice, which is probably I can relate because I didn't come up through
[Guest]: the intellectual route.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, all my exposures were because I was trying to relate in terms of my lived
[Guest]: experience.
[Guest]: So, I didn't come through the intellectual route, which I think is very critical to understand
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: And what I also think of it, and the reason I won't litigate this too much, is that
[Amit Varma]: I have increasingly come to believe that the biographical details of the life of a dead
[Amit Varma]: man are kind of irrelevant.
[Amit Varma]: They've left impacts on the world in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: And those impacts are important, especially their ideas.
[Amit Varma]: So we should debate their ideas and discuss their ideas and what we learn from that.
[Amit Varma]: But the biographical details is something useful served by going into it because a guy
[Amit Varma]: is dead and the guy should be dead.
[Amit Varma]: Like his ideas in Hind Swaraj are kind of ridiculous, you know, his ideas on caste also
[Amit Varma]: evolve in strange ways.
[Amit Varma]: In the last decade of his life, he's completely lost it with the kind of experiments that
[Amit Varma]: he does like sleeping naked with his 17 year old grandniece, Manu, you know, all the other
[Amit Varma]: leaders of the movement kind of like, you know, what the fuck, what's wrong with this
[Amit Varma]: guy.
[Amit Varma]: But I think at that level, that's irrelevant.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, in certain ways, he was a great man in certain ways, he was exactly the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: And but what we are left with is his ideas and the learnings that we can take from that.
[Amit Varma]: And the subject of noticing sentences, I love the sentence of yours, why don't we look at
[Amit Varma]: the sky?
[Amit Varma]: That's such a beautiful sentence.
[Amit Varma]: And I think more of us would benefit from a looking at the sky and be talking to the
[Amit Varma]: person next to us, instead of being observed in our smartphones all the time and just being
[Amit Varma]: sort of in that abstract kind of world.
[Amit Varma]: Let me sort of in the context of the current time and a debate that you and I have had,
[Amit Varma]: let me, you know, talk about something that we both agree on, that the end does not justify
[Amit Varma]: the means, right?
[Amit Varma]: Now, how I often think of it in the context of the state is that look, I'm against coercion.
[Amit Varma]: Consent is everything to me.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, I realize that the existence of the state is necessary to protect our rights.
[Amit Varma]: You need a state with a monopoly on violence to protect these individual rights with you
[Amit Varma]: and I hold so dear.
[Amit Varma]: But the existence of the state itself implies, as Gandhi also pointed out, implies a certain
[Amit Varma]: base degree of violence, because to protect our rights, you have to first infringe our
[Amit Varma]: rights in terms of the state existing, it exists on our taxes, and there is coercion
[Amit Varma]: involved and the very notion of the monopoly of violence is exactly that.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, my thinking always has been that I'm not going to be an anarchist and
[Amit Varma]: say there should be no state, because society would evolve towards having a state of some
[Amit Varma]: sort, even if there wasn't one in, you know, in a perfect condition.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm always conscious that as I wrote a column, you know, as is the headline of a
[Amit Varma]: column I once wrote that every act of government is an act of violence.
[Amit Varma]: Therefore, whenever we think of the state doing something, we have to acknowledge the
[Amit Varma]: cost.
[Amit Varma]: We can't pretend that there is no cost, that government money is unlimited or the state
[Amit Varma]: can do whatever to solve this problem.
[Amit Varma]: Everything that it does has a cost and we need to kind of acknowledge the cost.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, there needs to be a really high bar on what the state should do.
[Amit Varma]: Because with everything it does in some way or the other, it is infringing on our freedom
[Amit Varma]: as citizens.
[Amit Varma]: And I would say that a justifiable intervention of the state would therefore come in protecting
[Amit Varma]: our rights and protecting our lives.
[Amit Varma]: Now,
[Guest]: I think I'll just add, you know, it's not the economic cost.
[Guest]: That's a marginal, it's a moral cost.
[Guest]: It's a coercion.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a coercion.
[Guest]: And Gandhi actually said it in another form, that every action of the state is manifestation
[Unknown]: of violence.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And it's that violence that needs to be restrained because we need the state, but only need it
[Guest]: to that limited degree and not beyond.
[Guest]: Which is why, and this is something is very new, I mean, you know, and maybe we'll have
[Guest]: another occasion to discuss this, this distinction that Gandhi drew.
[Guest]: And I think there has been very little understanding or discourse on that, that Gandhi rarely spoke
[Guest]: of rights.
[Guest]: He was speaking of duties.
[Guest]: For the last three or four hundred years, we have been talking of rights.
[Guest]: What's the difference?
[Guest]: And the way I see it, and like I said, I'm not an academic coming from that world, as
[Guest]: a practitioner as I see it, rights are our relationship with each other, governing our
[Guest]: relationship with each other, enforced through the coercive power of the state or the arbitration
[Guest]: power of the state, the judiciary.
[Guest]: That of course depends on whether the state is efficient and capable and even wants to
[Guest]: to do that kind of activity.
[Guest]: Second, duties is our own, it's our commitment to ourselves.
[Guest]: That's duty.
[Guest]: Which means that irrespective of what the rights are, and which is what Gandhi had,
[Guest]: in fact just last night I was reading something because I was looking at something and I suddenly
[Guest]: came across, I think Gandhi had an exchange with HG Wales regarding these rights and duties.
[Guest]: And then I think somebody else wrote to him about this Universal Declaration of Human
[Guest]: Rights, which of course happened a few months after Gandhi passed away, he died in January,
[Guest]: that probably happened later, but the same year.
[Guest]: And Gandhi had the same point.
[Guest]: And this is something that's kind of coming from, say, my first introduction to this kind
[Guest]: of social science was through Ayn Rand, and therefore the focus was on rights.
[Guest]: And then my experience through many activities, farmers, elsewhere, where property rights
[Guest]: became a key component of our frame.
[Guest]: But it was rights.
[Guest]: And Indira Gandhi introduced duties into the constitution and therefore it became a problem
[Guest]: because you are trying to institutionalize duties.
[Guest]: Duties cannot be institutionalized because it's our own, which you can see daily on the
[Guest]: streets of anywhere, village to cities.
[Guest]: Why do most people, you know, anyone could, any two, five people could gang up against
[Guest]: one and snatch away the mobile or the money or whatever, whatever, just beat him up for
[Guest]: fun.
[Guest]: 99.99% of the time you don't see that kind of things happening.
[Guest]: The poorest of the poor in India would not, 99.999% of the time, throw a stone at a Mercedes
[Guest]: just because the Mercedes is passing by.
[Guest]: That's duty.
[Guest]: It's not conscious, it's ingrained that we perform duties because we believe that's
[Guest]: the right thing to do, which cannot be enforced by law.
[Guest]: And therefore, Indira Gandhi did a great disservice by doing this duty business into the constitution
[Guest]: and which has meant that we have now, what should I say, rightized our duties.
[Guest]: Which means, you know, all the positive rights, etc. has been passed off as rights because
[Amit Varma]: we've given up on duties.
[Amit Varma]: So let me kind of push back on that.
[Amit Varma]: Like first, I find that Gandhi's thinking on this particular subject is incoherent and
[Amit Varma]: we can go into that in detail later, but I think there's a category error in talking
[Amit Varma]: of rights and duties like this, in the sense that I think, like, first of all, rights are
[Amit Varma]: fundamental.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, what does it mean to be a citizen?
[Amit Varma]: What does it mean to be an individual?
[Amit Varma]: Rights are central to the way I think about our relationships with each other.
[Amit Varma]: But rights and duties exist in separate domains, except for the duty, you could say we have
[Amit Varma]: to not infringe the rights of others.
[Amit Varma]: And if you phrase it like that, in that particular sense, that one duty is something that is
[Amit Varma]: connected to rights.
[Amit Varma]: But other duties, like you correctly said, I think come about from the voluntary actions
[Amit Varma]: of individuals, you know, and therefore cannot be coerced by the state.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, Indira Gandhi got it completely wrong over there, along with many other things
[Amit Varma]: she got wrong.
[Amit Varma]: So for example, I might have a duty towards you that Borun is in his 60s, let me not keep
[Amit Varma]: him talking for more than five hours.
[Amit Varma]: And that might be my duty.
[Amit Varma]: And you might have a duty towards me that, you know, Amit has come all the way to Delhi
[Amit Varma]: to call me for a podcast, we'll talk for seven hours, I'll give him what he wants.
[Amit Varma]: But these are voluntary actions.
[Amit Varma]: These are things that we feel and like you correctly said, a lot of what is so beautiful
[Amit Varma]: about social interactions is this sense of duty towards our fellow citizens where we
[Amit Varma]: are helping strangers without needing to and, you know, looking after others and all of
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: Even within families.
[Amit Varma]: And rights are in a separate domain.
[Guest]: I think rights are like a hygiene factor, I think, I mean, this may not be the whole
[Guest]: story.
[Guest]: Because firstly, and historically, societies have existed predating rights.
[Amit Varma]: And if rights are defined just by the states, then there is a problem.
[Amit Varma]: No, but they're not.
[Amit Varma]: I agree that rights exist before the state, except that we implicitly recognize each other's
[Amit Varma]: rights.
[Amit Varma]: Some duties emerge from that.
[Guest]: Some.
[Guest]: And, you know, this is, in a way, semantic.
[Guest]: But I think it is important that it is because we recognize our fundamental duty to ourselves,
[Guest]: we begin to recognize what is the basis of our relationship with somebody else.
[Guest]: Because we look at that person as our equal.
[Guest]: And it's only in the interaction phase, in some form, in some specific spheres, that
[Guest]: the issue of rights might come in.
[Guest]: Otherwise, 95% of the time, we are all functioning in our domains of duties, not in the domains
[Guest]: of rights.
[Amit Varma]: Because just think of it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but, Varun, those domains of duties emerge from our implicit understanding of
[Amit Varma]: rights.
[Amit Varma]: For example, it is my duty that if I disagree with you, and I suddenly feel violent, it
[Amit Varma]: is my duty not to slap you, right?
[Amit Varma]: But that duty emerges because I understand your rights and my rights, and that I would
[Amit Varma]: be infringing on your rights by slapping you.
[Guest]: But maybe it's kind of...
[Guest]: No, I think it doesn't end there.
[Guest]: Because if you do slap me, then I can invoke the state to say that, arbitrate and figure
[Guest]: out whether this is right, wrong, etc, etc.
[Guest]: And therefore, the rights, while we say it is inalienable, but in a strict sense, it
[Guest]: is dependent on that somebody, ultimately, who's willing and able to do it in a manner
[Guest]: which is just and proper.
[Guest]: Which is...
[Guest]: Which is true.
[Guest]: But which is not the whole story.
[Guest]: Because 95% of our interactions are not based on our...
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but you're not disagreeing with me.
[Guest]: No, I'm not disagreeing.
[Guest]: I'm not disagreeing at all.
[Guest]: I'm only saying that we should not categorize it as either or.
[Guest]: That's what I'm saying.
[Guest]: That is the relationship between the two.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm saying there's no dichotomy.
[Amit Varma]: I'm saying that it's a category error, because rights sort of depend on the state and they
[Amit Varma]: need to be kind of, you know, formally spelt out and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And duties emerge within society from this incredibly rich web of personal interactions.
[Amit Varma]: But the question that I was coming to, is that therefore, I think, because of the way
[Amit Varma]: that I see it, that, of course, coercion is bad, but you need a limited amount of coercion
[Amit Varma]: to protect everybody's rights and make sure that there isn't only coercion.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of to me what I call the liberal paradox.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, we need to litigate very closely what a state should do and what a state should
[Amit Varma]: not do.
[Amit Varma]: Because everything a state does is a violent act in its end.
[Amit Varma]: So whatever, wherever you invoke the use of the state, you have to be very clear about
[Amit Varma]: why you are doing it.
[Amit Varma]: And this is where you and I kind of disagreed, where at the start of COVID, I felt that in
[Amit Varma]: such a massive crisis, that the blunt tool of a lockdown at that time, you know, today,
[Amit Varma]: we can look back on how the lockdown was done really badly.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, a lockdown at a different point in time is a different matter.
[Amit Varma]: And a lockdown is a coercive tool that states will misuse inevitably in, like I heard recently,
[Amit Varma]: because of the Delhi fog, somebody was musing about how Delhi should have a lockdown.
[Amit Varma]: Inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Which is absolute nonsense.
[Amit Varma]: And on all those matters, I agree with you.
[Amit Varma]: But when the lockdown was first called, I think in an idealized sense, there is a moment
[Amit Varma]: where a lockdown may be necessary.
[Amit Varma]: I understand it's an infringement on our rights and no one defends those more than me.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, the duty of the state is to protect the lives of its citizens.
[Amit Varma]: And this seemed to be the edge case where that would be the case.
[Amit Varma]: But you, on the other hand, took this principle stand that no, lockdowns are wrong, period.
[Guest]: No, no, no, I didn't take a principle stand on lockdown.
[Guest]: This thing was that we are not ending up normalizing another expansion of the state.
[Guest]: And that would come to haunt us as it has.
[Guest]: The Delhi may have a lockdown now and now we can have a, now, it's not an India phenomenon
[Guest]: at all.
[Guest]: China and the Chinese party have won the war as of now.
[Guest]: Every government is aspiring to wield that kind of authority over their people.
[Guest]: We have normalized it.
[Guest]: That to me, no, lockdown is secondary.
[Guest]: The pandemic will come and go.
[Guest]: It has happened before, it will happen again.
[Guest]: That all is secondary.
[Guest]: And secondly, incidentally, there was no manual, including WHO's, which called for lockdown
[Guest]: in case of epidemics and pandemics.
[Guest]: So that's aside.
[Guest]: You know, it shows, to me, it shows it's not the lockdown, this will pass.
[Guest]: It is how we were just waiting, that as a society, not just our leaders, as a society
[Guest]: we were all waiting for an opportunity to allow the state to expand itself.
[Guest]: And that it has happened in the freest of the free countries.
[Guest]: To me, that is incredible.
[Guest]: And that, this is going to now lead to a kind of internal divisions, which didn't exist
[Guest]: a few years ago.
[Guest]: So to me, this is, I mean, the cost of this in societal terms, forget the health, I mean,
[Guest]: yes, some people, I mean, we have in one crore people die in India every year.
[Guest]: So there will be a few people dying extra.
[Guest]: That might be me, that might be you, that might be somebody, I mean, we have lost two
[Guest]: members of our family, one due to COVID, one non-COVID, but that we all take it that this
[Guest]: is going to happen.
[Guest]: But to me, this cost, because we have no conception today what is a state.
[Guest]: And this has been normalized not overnight, not because China did it and we copycatted
[Guest]: China.
[Guest]: It has been happening for the last 50 years, 60 years, since the end of the Second World
[Guest]: War.
[Guest]: Second World War was fought against the Nazis, the National Socialists.
[Guest]: After that, Britain had its National Health Service.
[Guest]: Now we can say that we can expand the state, but every time we are expanding the scope
[Guest]: of the state, we are completely forgetting that we have also normalized one extra bit
[Guest]: of violence.
[Guest]: And there is no pullback.
[Guest]: I am not seeing any pullback, there were accidental pullbacks, like in 89, as we can see now,
[Guest]: the collapse of the Berlin Wall and everyone was so elated that the wall has gone and therefore
[Guest]: new dawn of freedom, etc.
[Guest]: But it wasn't.
[Guest]: 91 to me is another great example, that 91 liberalization in India was state-driven.
[Guest]: And today, it's the curtsy of the state which is reversing it.
[Guest]: So we have completely disconnected our values and morality and duty from the kind of instrument
[Guest]: that we are willing to wield.
[Guest]: This is hugely costly.
[Amit Varma]: I'll make a couple of observations and I'll come to a question.
[Amit Varma]: Observation one is that of course I agree with you that any power that the state takes,
[Amit Varma]: it never holds it back.
[Amit Varma]: It's extremely rare, like you pointed out, and therefore it's a problem and it's something
[Amit Varma]: that we should fight as Thomas Jefferson famously said that, you know, we can't take liberty
[Amit Varma]: for granted.
[Amit Varma]: It requires eternal vigilance, in his memorable phrase.
[Guest]: His phrase was refreshed by the blood of...
[Guest]: So I'll make my next...
[Guest]: Eternal vigilance was Acton.
[Amit Varma]: No, eternal vigilance wasn't Acton, it was Jefferson.
[Amit Varma]: Acton.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: We'll leave this in the recording so one of us, possibly me, can be proved to be wrong.
[Amit Varma]: There's no shame in that.
[Amit Varma]: My second observation is this, that we can evaluate an action by the right thing or the
[Amit Varma]: right or wrong thing to do through two lenses.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one is a moral lens, a deontological lens, but to cut away the jargon, the moral
[Amit Varma]: lens that if we agree coercion is immoral, then if something involves coercion, it is
[Amit Varma]: wrong period.
[Amit Varma]: The other which comes into play when you think about what the state should do, where it is
[Amit Varma]: justified in using coercion, is a utilitarian lens where you say that, you know, the end
[Amit Varma]: makes it worth it, etc, etc.
[Amit Varma]: And I am extremely suspicious of utilitarianism because of the Hayek's knowledge problem that
[Amit Varma]: you can never actually know the outcome of anything.
[Amit Varma]: And whenever you project a particular outcome while designing a policy, all your biases
[Amit Varma]: will come into play and your ignorance will come into play.
[Amit Varma]: And we should be wary of utilitarianism because you might get locked in, you might get locked
[Amit Varma]: in.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, when the lockdown was called, it was called on a utilitarian calculation
[Amit Varma]: that something really bad may happen.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, this is also bad.
[Amit Varma]: But we got to do this, we got to choose this over the other.
[Amit Varma]: Now my question to you is, let's take a thought experiment.
[Amit Varma]: Now COVID, we were in a fog of information, then we understand it a little better now.
[Amit Varma]: But let's say that there was a pandemic, which had, let's say an R, which is how many person
[Amit Varma]: an average person spreads it to, an R of three, which is very high, and a fatality rate of
[Amit Varma]: 50%, which is also very high.
[Amit Varma]: Would you then call a lockdown?
[Amit Varma]: Is there any rate at which you would say a lockdown is justified?
[Amit Varma]: Like what if mathematically, it was inevitable, that if we don't call a lockdown, everybody
[Amit Varma]: will at some point die?
[Amit Varma]: You know, at what point do you say that a lockdown is justified?
[Amit Varma]: To me, this is a thought experiment.
[Guest]: I look at it beyond the pandemic.
[Guest]: One reason being that something has been with me for much longer than the pandemic is very
[Guest]: new.
[Guest]: So the knowledge problem is much greater.
[Guest]: But in my thought experiment, I've laid it out.
[Guest]: To me, I'm using an analogy to hopefully to get to that.
[Guest]: That Newton's third law, you know, very famous school students know it, you know, action
[Guest]: reaction, politicians use it, whatever.
[Guest]: But does it actually, has there been any engineer who's been able to craft that law into action?
[Guest]: Even nature has not.
[Guest]: Okay, I'm an art student, I'm very ignorant, what is that law?
[Guest]: That is, you know, every action would have an equal reaction, condition that there is
[Guest]: no friction.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So, the two balls, two planets, two stars will come and go, come and go, bounce each
[Guest]: other indefinitely, because there's no friction.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: That's the law.
[Guest]: That's true.
[Guest]: Provided those conditions apply.
[Guest]: And even nature, you know, the ultimate reality as far as we can conceive it, even nature
[Guest]: hasn't been able to create that ideal situation ever, which is why truth is a pursuit.
[Guest]: These challenges will come, pandemic, lockdown, whatever, whatever.
[Guest]: The question is, are we recognizing where we might err and therefore figuring out from
[Guest]: the beginning that how to hold the line?
[Guest]: Otherwise, I can document from 1947 or 46 or whatever, when the Second World War ended,
[Guest]: the whole world, not just China and the Soviet Union and all the rest, whole world has incrementally
[Guest]: moved towards enhancing the state and normalizing violence.
[Guest]: Now the violence is, you know, I agree with Steven Pinker, that the physical form of violence,
[Guest]: you know, may have decreased, which is true.
[Guest]: But the coercive form of violence hasn't, it has expanded all around, which to me, you
[Guest]: know, it is not because we don't need to do, there could be circumstances where we need
[Guest]: exceptions and we need to figure out.
[Guest]: But if we lose that line, which we have, the whole world seems to have lost that line,
[Guest]: that where is that line where we are going to, at least a recognition of that line.
[Guest]: Today, it is a blank check.
[Guest]: All of us expect in the name of our rights, that let's take a claim, the state will deliver.
[Guest]: If we have the numbers, if we have the votes, we can get to whatever.
[Guest]: To me, that line has become invisible.
[Guest]: In fact, even in our imagination, is a huge cost.
[Amit Varma]: So here's the thing.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with that.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with that so strongly that I will urge listeners to rewind this as it were and
[Amit Varma]: listen to what you just said one more time.
[Amit Varma]: That strongly I agree with it.
[Amit Varma]: But you're not answering the question and the question to me is important because, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the recognition that there is a state is a recognition that there are exceptions.
[Amit Varma]: So going back to the thought experiment, you know, at what point would you say a lockdown
[Amit Varma]: is justified?
[Amit Varma]: Where do you draw the line?
[Amit Varma]: You said about holding the line against state overreach.
[Amit Varma]: What I have increasingly seen is that, you know, you and I are thinking this out, we
[Amit Varma]: are thrashing it out, we're looking at all the different angles.
[Amit Varma]: In this particular case, I recognize that there are trade-offs, that whatever a government
[Amit Varma]: is to do, the costs are seen and the benefits are unseen.
[Amit Varma]: You can't see the lives you save, you can see the lives that go, whether you call a
[Amit Varma]: lockdown or the other way around.
[Amit Varma]: But the positions many people took on this depends on which tribe they are from.
[Amit Varma]: So Trump did not call a lockdown, so people are anti-lockdown there on the right.
[Amit Varma]: But here on the right, Modi called a lockdown, so people were pro-lockdown.
[Amit Varma]: And these positions are kind of hardened.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm just trying to figure it out on my own because I still think we don't have enough
[Amit Varma]: knowledge on whether a lockdown and what extent of lockdown was the right decision then, though
[Amit Varma]: at that time it seemed sensible to me, given the fog of knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: But I would say that there are some circumstances when a lockdown is necessary and some when
[Amit Varma]: they're absolutely not.
[Amit Varma]: So is that something that you agree with?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a condition in which you would say, if the R is 3 and if we know that 50 lakh
[Amit Varma]: people will die, 5 crore people will die, whatever the number is, at what point do you
[Amit Varma]: say that lockdown is necessary?
[Guest]: Would you ever say that?
[Guest]: You know, as an engineer, as a trained engineer, I mean my education is engineering.
[Guest]: I get the knowledge problem, don't bring that up.
[Guest]: No, not the knowledge problem.
[Guest]: This is an experiment.
[Guest]: Not the knowledge problem.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: It's the lack of even recognition in our imagination that what is the nature of the problem.
[Guest]: That you know, it's like, it's like what you said, you know, the wars might happen, some
[Guest]: people may cheat, Ramayana Mahabharata, the war would be fought, not in an ideal situation
[Guest]: because the concretes are never ideal.
[Guest]: So there could be situations where people may do lockdown, people may not do lockdown.
[Guest]: But to me, that's not the point.
[Guest]: The point is, firstly, what's the process through which we are going to arrive at that
[Guest]: kind of a conclusion and more drastically, and which is what modern politics and particularly
[Guest]: Gandhian politics should teach us, that have we, did we prepare the ground, that is the
[Guest]: popular awareness and the participation in the process, so that there is a deepening
[Guest]: of awareness about where the line is, so that it can be pulled back.
[Guest]: So if we have not done all that, then to me, if you do this, we are on a downhill.
[Amit Varma]: Bhai, I agree with all that, but you're giving abstract answers to a concrete question.
[Guest]: I wouldn't do that, if you want to really ask me, ask me personally, you would never
[Amit Varma]: have a lockdown.
[Amit Varma]: I would never have a lockdown.
[Amit Varma]: Never.
[Guest]: Even if everyone is guaranteed to die.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, because even I will die, but I would not impose, I would not try to impose
[Guest]: my will without first ensuring that there is firstly, I know the knowledge problem has
[Guest]: been overcome to the extent it can be overcome.
[Guest]: And secondly, that the wider society in which I am one, is in sync with and realizing the
[Guest]: consequences.
[Guest]: To me, can there be a greater this thing we all laugh at now, you know, it's quite common
[Guest]: now to laugh at Francis Fukuyama because of end of history.
[Guest]: Which is misinterpreted.
[Guest]: He never said that.
[Guest]: Yeah, he never said that.
[Guest]: He's a great, great, great.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: He's a very, I mean, a deep thinker.
[Guest]: I mean, one has to, so this is a misinterpretation, just like I believe you partly misinterpreted
[Guest]: Gandhi, Him Swaraj and all the rest.
[Guest]: We can have another discussion on that.
[Guest]: I don't want to go into that.
[Guest]: Or people can read Him Swaraj for themselves and read his work.
[Guest]: It's a short book.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a short book.
[Guest]: And like I did, it will, it is likely, and at least for me, it'll, it'll give you new
[Guest]: meanings from what he's saying.
[Guest]: So we can, we can discuss that separately, because then it's a bit more compromise.
[Guest]: Next thing is that as, and this is what gets me to the early points that I was saying about
[Guest]: public and the policy.
[Guest]: If we are not going to engage with the public to make them realize the implications, make
[Guest]: the whole society aware of the implications of what's going to happen, we are digging
[Guest]: our grave.
[Guest]: Gandhi's single biggest success or his effort was focused on raising this sensibility among
[Guest]: the people.
[Guest]: Everything else to me is secondary.
[Guest]: We today have outsourced citizenship, literally.
[Guest]: We expect somebody else to take care of everything that we want.
[Amit Varma]: That's a lovely phrase, outsourced citizenship.
[Guest]: Yeah, we have.
[Guest]: And it's a tragedy, it's going to cost us.
[Guest]: And this policy, in this approach, you know, that is why means become so important.
[Guest]: Because we have ignored the means through which we have arrived at that conclusion,
[Guest]: we have dug our grave.
[Guest]: It'll be a Herculean challenge trying to come out of it.
[Guest]: Because in the last 100, 150 years, the society, because, and you know, this is a distinction
[Guest]: I recently realized, I had read about it, but I had not really realized it.
[Guest]: I don't know if I had shared it with you earlier.
[Guest]: What we are confronting today is a bottom-up totalitarianism, not a top-down authoritarianism.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: That's a very good phrase.
[Guest]: Bottom-up.
[Guest]: It's not my phrase.
[Guest]: I think Hyde or somebody else, I listened to it and I've been re-listening and rethinking
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: And it's true.
[Guest]: Authoritarians can collapse, either because of counter-revolution, coup, palace coup,
[Guest]: people revolution, whatever, whatever.
[Guest]: Totalitarians don't collapse.
[Guest]: If they collapse, or when they do, they take the whole society down.
[Guest]: Hitler was one of only the latest, or the recent, and the most memorable, tragic example
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: Because the support base is not coming from the willpower of the leader, no matter what
[Amit Varma]: he claims.
[Amit Varma]: The demand is providing the supply.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: Which is why we need to prepare the ground.
[Guest]: Which is why I tried to shift from policy to public.
[Amit Varma]: And that's one place where Gandhi was spot on, where I absolutely agree with him.
[Amit Varma]: Spot on.
[Amit Varma]: Completely.
[Guest]: It has to be bottom-up.
[Guest]: And that is the power of today's modern totalitarianism, and you can see it everywhere.
[Guest]: Every society is now going through it, including the so-called free world of the West.
[Guest]: It's amazing how quickly they've adapted to this new normal.
[Guest]: Each side, and which is why we need to rethink politics.
[Guest]: Because this is happening in public eye, through the political process, because the political
[Guest]: process is increasingly geared to capitalizing on the us versus them, rather than political
[Guest]: process as it happens in a family, that you figure out what dispute to resolve, how much
[Guest]: resource to allocation, within a certain modicum of force, or authority of parents, and certain
[Guest]: modicum of negotiation.
[Guest]: You know, you may say that this weekend we'll go, you'll buy a book, next weekend you'll
[Guest]: go to a movie.
[Guest]: You do all such juggling act.
[Guest]: You know, so we shift our priorities, preferences, from the immediate to the next, etc. etc.
[Guest]: We do it all the time.
[Guest]: To me, this is fundamental.
[Guest]: We are digging our own grave.
[Guest]: So without that context, which is why engineering to me, this wouldn't have come to me, had
[Guest]: I not been rethinking Newton's third law, or any law for that matter.
[Guest]: Because third law is the most common way of rethinking that.
[Guest]: You know, for instance, we are sitting in a room.
[Guest]: This room is perhaps 10 feet.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: Whatever.
[Guest]: Whatever.
[Guest]: Can we measure it to its ultimate precision?
[Guest]: We can't.
[Guest]: We measure it only to the context to which it is necessary.
[Guest]: You know, so the concrete architect would have needed something else.
[Guest]: The old-time stone architecture would have needed something else.
[Guest]: The modern architecture, which might be whatever, titanium or whatever, whatever, would have
[Guest]: something else.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: To us, to me, what is important is the process through which you are arriving at, and realizing
[Guest]: the context in its totality.
[Guest]: That what is economically, politically, socially, technologically viable, and what is going
[Guest]: to be carried at the fallout.
[Guest]: To me, you know, to me, in fact, just last night, I think I wrote to a friend, because
[Guest]: I have most of my engagement interactions personally, which is why I am not in most
[Guest]: social media groups, because I like to talk to people, I am talking to you, I talk to
[Guest]: people personally.
[Guest]: So, I just wrote to her last night, actually, that this is a major challenge, to me it's
[Guest]: probably the number one challenge, that we are unable to figure out that the line is
[Guest]: even necessary.
[Guest]: Forget holding the line, we have completely surrendered that, which is why I said surrendered
[Guest]: our citizenship, because we the people are to be the sovereign.
[Guest]: Somebody else is claiming sovereignty, and you look at the other side, that sovereignty,
[Guest]: whether it is democratic, authoritarian, whatever, that sovereignty of the top is always temporary.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because either there will be an electoral change, or there will be a biological change,
[Guest]: that the person at the top will go at one point or the other, and even a natural death.
[Guest]: Some totalitarians have died that way, you know, Tito, for instance, he died that way
[Guest]: and he took the whole society with him in Yugoslavia.
[Guest]: Therefore, that change would be completely outside control, which is why Gandhi's rephrasing
[Guest]: of politics, and which I came, because between 1989, when V.P. Singh won, till today, most
[Guest]: of the time, I'll be extremely apprehensive about what we think of politics as such, what
[Guest]: we generally think of politics.
[Guest]: But last 5-6 years, because I was rethinking Gandhi as a practitioner, because politics
[Guest]: is the art of the possible, the practitioner, it's not a theoretical field.
[Guest]: And that field requires engagement with people.
[Guest]: That's what Gandhi kind of, you know, I mean, I won't say that this is my final position
[Guest]: because I can change again if I realise something different.
[Guest]: But as I stand today, as citizens, our primary responsibility is, or duty, is to reclaim
[Guest]: our citizenship, which we cannot do if we don't even imagine that there is such a line.
[Guest]: Today, the social sciences and the physical sciences and now the biological sciences all
[Guest]: have converged on giving up the line, which is why a right-wing, left-wing, everybody
[Guest]: can have a lockdown without a bother, because it doesn't exist in popular imagination.
[Guest]: That's the price.
[Guest]: Therefore, do whatever, you know, like Krishna, I mean, go to war, do whatever, at some point
[Guest]: a time might come when a war might be necessary.
[Guest]: But remember the line.
[Guest]: Why is it necessary?
[Guest]: Otherwise, we are sacrificing ourselves, which we are.
[Guest]: The whole world is sacrificing citizenship and self-sovereignty over all this rest that
[Guest]: has happened.
[Guest]: It's a tragedy.
[Guest]: So in this sense, in the political sense, Gatni has been an eye-opener for me in the
[Guest]: last 5-6 years.
[Guest]: Because I had no clue, you know, like most Indians, I'd said, like including coming from
[Guest]: a political family, that this has degenerated, this, that, and the other.
[Guest]: But this degeneration is not a kind of a, you know, a black magic by somebody else who
[Guest]: is kind of a magician, or a witch.
[Amit Varma]: So let me ask you a question.
[Amit Varma]: You've travelled a lot across the country.
[Amit Varma]: You meet people.
[Amit Varma]: Is that what you do?
[Guest]: You meet people more than anyone?
[Guest]: I try to.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Amit Varma]: So, like, my sense of what has happened recently is that Indian society was a, always illiberal,
[Amit Varma]: though there are threads of liberality, because anything you say about India, the opposite
[Amit Varma]: is also true.
[Amit Varma]: But there was an illiberal strain.
[Amit Varma]: There was also this kind of bigoted Hindutva kind of strain.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, we contain multitudes, but these strains were there.
[Amit Varma]: And these strains were never acknowledged.
[Amit Varma]: They were never worked upon.
[Amit Varma]: And now they've become dominant.
[Amit Varma]: In a way, politics has caught up with society.
[Amit Varma]: And I love the phrase bottom-up totalitarianism, because what I see as happening is that I
[Amit Varma]: think this movement is really driven from the bottom at this moment in time, that if
[Amit Varma]: Modi wasn't there, somebody else would be there.
[Amit Varma]: I think it has nothing to do with Modi or Hindutva.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: It's global, mostly.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm talking in the context of India, that this is driven, this specific strain, this
[Amit Varma]: anti-Muslim nature and all of that, whatever is happening, this harkening back to a supposed
[Amit Varma]: monolithic tradition and that people should wear bindis and all this should happen, which
[Amit Varma]: is very disturbing to me.
[Amit Varma]: And I think all of this is coming bottom-up.
[Amit Varma]: I see it very clearly, you know, Modi and Shah did not cause it.
[Amit Varma]: The BJP did not cause it.
[Amit Varma]: And they're riding a tiger which they cannot control.
[Amit Varma]: They cannot get off.
[Amit Varma]: And it is what it is.
[Amit Varma]: And it's going to continue for a while.
[Amit Varma]: Now you actually meet people, you're not an ivory tower intellectual, as to some extent
[Guest]: I am.
[Amit Varma]: At least to an extent I try to, I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense?
[Amit Varma]: Like my pessimistic sense is that this is who we are, this is what was supposed to happen.
[Amit Varma]: My optimistic sense is that, listen, we contain multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: The guy who hates Muslims may also want prosperity for other reasons.
[Amit Varma]: He may want his kids to go to a good school, he may want a job when his kids grow up.
[Amit Varma]: He may want a biryani made in a Muslim kitchen.
[Amit Varma]: So there are multitudes and maybe there is hope in appealing to some other, the better
[Amit Varma]: angels of their natures, as Pinker might put it.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't know if that's fruitless optimism.
[Amit Varma]: So you go out there, you meet people, beyond the bias of your optimism, because I know
[Amit Varma]: that you have an optimism bias, you believe that the world can be changed like Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: did.
[Amit Varma]: Beyond that, if you were to sit back and think about it, what is your sense?
[Amit Varma]: Should we be hopeful?
[Guest]: I mean, is there anything, any alternative to hope?
[Amit Varma]: That's a wrong question.
[Amit Varma]: Is there a reason for us to be hopeful?
[Amit Varma]: Like rationally, my brain tells me that no, it's going to get much worse.
[Guest]: I think it depends on whether we think something can be done.
[Guest]: More importantly, it is the responsibility of each of us to try to do something.
[Guest]: To me, that is the bottom line, because the outcome, we can't be sure, obviously.
[Guest]: But the process of participation and the process of engagement, that we can be.
[Guest]: The question is whether we think it is useful, you know, useful in the sense of that it may
[Guest]: initiate or sow the seeds of change at some point at least, or if we give up and say that
[Guest]: this is a downhill that we are headed.
[Guest]: So I mean, to me, since I don't know whether I'll of course become extinct, but I don't
[Guest]: know whether the species will be extinct and what time frame, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So to me, I mean, there's no alternative but to explore whatever options you have.
[Amit Varma]: My question is not about what we should do.
[Amit Varma]: I think both of us, in a sense, take a Lord Krishna approach to this that we can't control
[Amit Varma]: the outcome.
[Amit Varma]: We're going to do what we're going to do.
[Guest]: You know, and I think we should do what we think is the right thing to do.
[Amit Varma]: My question is about the ground reality.
[Guest]: Yeah, but the ground reality is us.
[Guest]: You know, isn't it amazing?
[Guest]: I'm really surprised.
[Guest]: I had never experienced it because we had never seen it this way.
[Guest]: That in my kind of environment, social circles, Hindutva was not imagined.
[Guest]: Yet it has become so apparent, it may not be dominant yet, but it has become or maybe
[Guest]: it's even retreating at some places, but it had captured an imagination of a section.
[Guest]: Which is why, apart and it got reflected in real life, that apart from our dual identity
[Guest]: in the real world versus the virtual world, the impact was that in real world, even many
[Guest]: families had a difficult problem having dinner together because the fear of raising issues
[Amit Varma]: that might blow up.
[Amit Varma]: Mummy, why didn't you wear a bindi today?
[Guest]: It might blow up.
[Guest]: So, that to me is a problem, a huge problem.
[Guest]: Which means that we are losing the essence of the social dimension of human civilization.
[Guest]: And that social dimension which has evolved through millions of years, you know, at least
[Guest]: 2-3 million years since the human race came about, was physical.
[Guest]: You know, one could be a Shakuni to hide the intention and try to manage, etc, etc.
[Guest]: But it was just a matter of time before people figured out that this is a Shakuni.
[Guest]: Because the interactions were physical, the costs and the benefits were enjoyed in a real
[Guest]: sense, which is what I'm saying that, I mean, apart from all the intellectualization, and
[Guest]: I know, I mean, I'll not even make a scratch the surface of it, even if I try my best,
[Guest]: that our first obligation to ourselves and of our kind, that is mankind, society, is
[Guest]: to reach out, to engage, to re-establish the legitimacy of reaching out and therefore the
[Guest]: legitimacy of the diversity.
[Guest]: Because our interactions are always very narrow, we are not, you know, like, we have biryani
[Guest]: once a month.
[Guest]: So our interaction is very narrow.
[Guest]: So should that be the defining criteria?
[Guest]: You know, so this wall that we have built, this boundary that you said a little earlier,
[Guest]: is in our mind.
[Guest]: Which is why to me, it's really, you know, even now, I mean, whenever I went to Jalgaon
[Guest]: last month, and that was an interior area, therefore you could see the sky so brilliantly.
[Guest]: Occasionally, even you could see meteors and the satellites moving.
[Guest]: And you could distinguish that which is a satellite and which is a meteor.
[Guest]: You know, to me, this is, you know, I mean, this is probably my most optimistic sense,
[Guest]: that look at the sky and the things might begin to shift because it will give us a perspective,
[Guest]: because we can all look at the sky.
[Guest]: But other than that, I think it is our obligation, our duty to reach out if we accept that man
[Guest]: is a social animal in the society and the state is only a small part of that society
[Guest]: and evolved at a particular time and kept crashing every few generations.
[Guest]: So the state part of it, to me, is secondary, necessary, evil, whatever way we want to look
[Guest]: at it.
[Guest]: But unless we as people, we as individuals, we as community, we as society are unable
[Guest]: to realize and recognize the necessity of that line, that where coercion and violence
[Guest]: will begin and how will we restrain it, we are onto the cannibalistic path.
[Guest]: It's just a matter of time because we are swallowed, which is why bottom-up totalitarianism
[Guest]: swallows up the followers and the leaders.
[Guest]: And it's not just with Hitler.
[Guest]: Think of the French Revolution.
[Amit Varma]: It's only colorful, cannibalistic path.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, isn't it amazing that the French Revolution consumed its own leaders?
[Guest]: You know, so graphically, the guillotine not just consumed the king, it consumed them.
[Amit Varma]: Inevitably.
[Amit Varma]: I feel like I've been asking you the question, how bad are things and you keep answering
[Amit Varma]: with we can change it, but which is, of course, inspirational.
[Guest]: So I don't think we can change it.
[Guest]: I think, as I said, we got to do what we got to do, is there an option?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Because I don't know whether things will change.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: So my final question, and this is based on the work that you did with those tribals for
[Amit Varma]: forest rights, which you alluded to earlier, and which is in fact documented in this superb
[Amit Varma]: documentary called India Awakes, which I will link from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll give a CliffsNotes version of it for my listeners, that Barun was essentially
[Amit Varma]: part of a group of excellent people.
[Guest]: He was more an observer and a narrator rather than an actual doer.
[Amit Varma]: Correct.
[Amit Varma]: But he was part of the, and he will, of course, downplay his role, but he was part of this
[Amit Varma]: movement with some excellent people and they were trying to get, you know, property rights
[Amit Varma]: for tribals because property rights is really at the core of so much that he and I believe
[Amit Varma]: and perhaps we can someday do a separate episode on that.
[Amit Varma]: And the problem was proving that these people stayed in these particular lands over which
[Amit Varma]: they wanted property rights.
[Amit Varma]: Now there is no paperwork, there's nothing.
[Amit Varma]: How do you prove a thing like that to the government?
[Amit Varma]: And what Barun and his fellow travelers did was they use Google Earth data to go back
[Amit Varma]: 15, 20 years, whatever, and actually prove from the data that these people had actually
[Amit Varma]: lived in and occupied these lands for a specific period of time.
[Amit Varma]: And this data was so convincing that the government eventually allowed property rights to these
[Amit Varma]: tribals.
[Amit Varma]: And then the most interesting part of the story, which comes in the postscript, which
[Amit Varma]: when you told me I was, I was just knocked off by it, is that for the first time in their
[Amit Varma]: lives, when they built houses now, they built toilets within those houses because they had
[Amit Varma]: that sense of permanence that they may not have to move tomorrow.
[Amit Varma]: You know, just such a sharp example of how incentives can work.
[Amit Varma]: And when I look at that, it's it seems to me remarkable that tribals who are asserting
[Amit Varma]: the right over a land rightfully, which where they've lived for hundreds of years, should
[Amit Varma]: be able to do so with a technology that is so recent.
[Amit Varma]: And it must have taken such a mental shift on all your parts to even suddenly realize
[Amit Varma]: that yes, we can use Google Earth data to actually prove all of this and kind of make
[Amit Varma]: it happen.
[Amit Varma]: What was that moment like when that realization happens and it all works out?
[Guest]: Because I think it happened somewhat differently in a sense that I was an outsider.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Guest]: Archvaini in Gujarat had been working in the tribal pockets for decades.
[Guest]: And they have been primarily there initially, they worked a lot on the displacement issue
[Guest]: rehabilitation after the dam, the Narmada Dam.
[Guest]: So they had roots in the communities in which they worked.
[Guest]: And they were part of the movement which I observed from the sidelines, which tried to
[Guest]: enact the Forest Rights Act, which would recognize the rights of the communities that live there.
[Guest]: Then the question came, okay, we recognize it in the abstract.
[Guest]: How do we define it in concrete?
[Guest]: You know, how do you know that my arm is not reaching your nose?
[Guest]: And there I think it was Ambrish Mehta, who is one of the core of the Archvaini, looking
[Guest]: at how to get that and that was almost coincided, it was a coincidence again, that Google Earth
[Guest]: was beginning to come on.
[Guest]: You know, second half of, you know, after 2006-7-8, Google map was just beginning to
[Guest]: appear and we could give and then what happened was that archival maps, that is, Google was
[Guest]: also trying to put up as, you know, going back as much as they could, because initially
[Guest]: the maps were all the later ones that they had.
[Guest]: So they went back and that kind of made Ambrish realize first that if we could get maps of
[Guest]: 2000, I mean these images, they were not maps actually, these satellite images from 2004-5-6
[Guest]: etc., you might have a much more granular picture of, because a right would have to be determined
[Guest]: on the ground.
[Guest]: So it's a concrete thing, it's not an abstract thing, freedom of speech.
[Guest]: You know, it's a concrete thing.
[Guest]: So it has to be determined.
[Guest]: How will we determine?
[Guest]: One is you determine culture etc., which is provision is there, you know, the elders agree
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: But the state would typically say that there is an interest in all of you to agree among
[Guest]: each other to claim this.
[Guest]: So this was Ambrish's, I mean, and to me, I was technologically novice, in fact, one
[Guest]: of my first trips during this period when I went to Gujarat to see actually this, that
[Guest]: the first time I realized that I had another phone at that time, the Nokia, that it had
[Guest]: a GPS in it and a neighbor who was traveling in the train showed me how to use it because
[Guest]: I had never even known what a GPS was, even in my own phone, because I never needed to
[Guest]: use it.
[Guest]: I had a Google map that I'll use to come to this recording studio, looking at the map.
[Guest]: Yeah, so there was nothing.
[Guest]: So firstly, that was first step that I think Ambrish did, figured that the Google map particularly
[Guest]: going back and so he actually corresponded with Google, seeking that, please see if you
[Guest]: can provide maps going back.
[Guest]: So that was one step.
[Guest]: Then the question was, the maps themselves are not sufficient.
[Guest]: Because how do you know what you are seeing on the map is actually the place or what we
[Guest]: see on the image is actually the village that you are in.
[Guest]: So that's where the GPS came in and that was another kind of technological coincidence
[Guest]: that the availability and the applicability and access to GPS kept increasing, first through
[Guest]: the phones and then through the, through handheld simple devices, which are pretty low cost
[Guest]: and with a degree of accuracy that you can tolerate.
[Guest]: That then gave this idea that this can be done, that you would know what place where,
[Guest]: because image doesn't tell you that is exactly what you are seeing or where you are.
[Guest]: So those two correlations you can make that this is where you are and that's the image
[Guest]: of the place you are seeing.
[Guest]: My surprise was not so much the technological change because technological change we have
[Guest]: seen, I grew up in an area where at a time when there was no telephone.
[Guest]: I mean, yeah, literally, I waited five, four years in Delhi waiting for a landline connection.
[Guest]: So I have spent that time so that technological change doesn't surprise me as much.
[Guest]: What surprised me was that in one of our first visit when I went with Ambrish and Drupty
[Guest]: and others, that's why I need to go to their field and see this, was the ease with which
[Guest]: a semi-literate person could understand what was being sought and figure out why and how
[Guest]: to operate that GPS.
[Guest]: That to me was a surprise because here was I, say 15, 10, 12 years ago, an engineering
[Guest]: graduate, had no idea what GPS was and here were people who many of whom at that time
[Guest]: didn't even have mobiles and the mobiles were that old type, you know, the button type,
[Guest]: not these feature phones as they call it.
[Guest]: So some of them had that.
[Guest]: Connectivity was extremely poor.
[Guest]: You had to go to a hilltop to get connectivity.
[Guest]: But they could relate and I began to realize, I began to experience what Hayek was talking
[Guest]: about discrete and dispersed information.
[Guest]: That people living on the ground know their community and their terrain like the back
[Guest]: of their hand, which I sitting anywhere else or anybody else sitting somewhere else would
[Guest]: never know.
[Guest]: So they already know what they have.
[Guest]: The question only is to figure out through technology so that other people who do not
[Guest]: know can figure out that this is really true.
[Guest]: So they took it like fish in water, as they say.
[Guest]: That surprised me, really surprised me and since then Ambrish and Archvaini, Drupty and
[Guest]: others have reached hundreds of villages primarily in Gujarat to train people, local community
[Guest]: to undertake it.
[Guest]: So that, you know, it is lived experience.
[Guest]: The strength of this movement in their part of India is precisely because the ownership
[Guest]: is claimed not by Archvaini as such, but by the people themselves because they have figured
[Guest]: out, they have understood what is being sought and how and how they can, you know.
[Guest]: So they are participating in the process.
[Guest]: That brings me to the point that we had been discussing for last two hours.
[Guest]: The focus on the process, the focus on the public.
[Guest]: I didn't realize it as much as I am talking now, but I realized that the people can do
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: I mean, it's amazing how much people can do without their formal education, which kind
[Guest]: of reinforce something that I've been telling my liberal, libertarian friends for years,
[Guest]: that we are barking up the wrong tree by saying that we need awareness and education.
[Guest]: It has to be put in the context.
[Guest]: You know, lived experience of people where those awareness and education could help.
[Guest]: This was a demonstration of that in my own lifetime.
[Guest]: So I know.
[Guest]: So, I mean, what they achieved and how they did it to me is a phenomenal learning for
[Guest]: me because I had no idea that this could happen.
[Guest]: You know, property rights to me was an abstraction.
[Guest]: For them it was life and death.
[Guest]: So who has an incentive to grasp it?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So what this, I mean, of course, there are a lot of limitations.
[Guest]: They have had to fight legal cases and it has gone on for 10 years till it's been going
[Guest]: on the way the Indian system works.
[Guest]: But to me, this just provides a glimpse.
[Guest]: Just like Sharad Joshi's movement in 2000 provided a glimpse of what's possible when
[Guest]: you are able to connect with people on terrains or figuratively, terrains in which it matters
[Guest]: to them.
[Guest]: So it kind of opened my eyes, actually concretized what I was abstracting.
[Guest]: You know, like high discrete dispersed information, etc. was abstracting.
[Guest]: But here I was concretizing.
[Guest]: So to me, it was, I mean, it transformed my life.
[Guest]: Forget about the, you know, Amrish and all are still at it, trying to change the community
[Guest]: and get some benefits.
[Guest]: And secondly, the consequence was not just the toilet.
[Guest]: That came later or perhaps together.
[Guest]: The main consequence, which to me was the sense of dignity.
[Guest]: That here were people who were beginning to climb the ladder of citizenship.
[Guest]: That they are equal partners as citizens of this country.
[Guest]: To me, there can't be anything, no substitute for that.
[Guest]: The rights are no rights.
[Guest]: To me, it's phenomenal.
[Guest]: You know, people said that, that, you know, in fact, one example, almost 10 years ago
[Guest]: now or maybe around, may not be 10, is not 10, probably 2013, 14, 15, whatever.
[Guest]: In one place, we had gone to a village, you know, so Trupti Amrish, Arch Vaini had organized
[Guest]: a meeting and I had gone just like so many others have been, just to see what people
[Guest]: think and believe and act.
[Guest]: So one man was narrating his story.
[Guest]: And this is one of those moments from the ground that I'll probably never forget.
[Guest]: One middle-aged man narrating his story.
[Guest]: He told about all this map, application, this, that and the other, rejection, reapplication,
[Guest]: review and all that.
[Guest]: But to me, what remains is not all that, is that he said, previously when we used to go
[Guest]: to a government office, whichever, Tassilda or Panchayat or whatever, they would never
[Guest]: even ask us to sit down.
[Guest]: Today, they ask us to sit down and sometimes even offer us a glass of water.
[Guest]: That to me was eye-opening.
[Guest]: That's what citizenship is.
[Guest]: That's what citizenship can be.
[Guest]: That's what we need to reclaim.
[Guest]: There's no substitute.
[Guest]: There is no substitute.
[Guest]: I would never have realized what is citizenship about and the significance of the process
[Guest]: unless I had actually experienced it and I still didn't grasp it till I began to focus,
[Guest]: you know, that's where Gandhi comes in as a practitioner because he was providing a
[Guest]: broader frame for practices and participation because that's what he is all about.
[Guest]: How to stimulate a process through participation.
[Guest]: So to me, this was a personal experience and therefore I can relate to Gandhi in a manner
[Guest]: that I am talking to you sitting across.
[Guest]: I am not looking at him as a Mahatma or a Bapu or a pedestal and all the rest.
[Guest]: I am looking at him as an illustration on a macro scale, at a scale perhaps the world
[Guest]: had never seen before or since.
[Guest]: What I was experiencing at the tiniest village among three, four hundred people.
[Guest]: So this connection, this was not a puzzle that fell in place at that time.
[Guest]: This is filling in place as I am traveling my journey and which is what makes me look
[Guest]: back at Gandhi so many times, particularly when I am facing practical challenges that
[Guest]: how will we overcome because I experienced it.
[Guest]: So Archabaini's work in that regard, you know, I was only a narrator.
[Guest]: My involvement is tertiary, which is true because what can I do from Delhi?
[Guest]: I don't even speak the language and I had no funding as such to help.
[Guest]: But whatever little we could, to me, this learning that I learned from those few years
[Guest]: that I was closely following this process, to me has been amazing.
[Guest]: That property rights is not a question of abstractions, you know, that it is our right.
[Guest]: We should be, the people should have the capacity to do their duty in order to claim that right.
[Amit Varma]: And I find this story inspiring for a number of reasons and reason number one is you see
[Amit Varma]: after centuries, a group of people getting empowered with agency and with dignity, as
[Amit Varma]: you've pointed out.
[Amit Varma]: And what I also find inspiring and which makes me hopeful for the future is that a modern
[Amit Varma]: technology, which Gandhi would probably have scoffed at, had it existed at the time of
[Amit Varma]: Ind Swaraj, plays a big part in empowering these individuals.
[Amit Varma]: And that's, in fact, one of the hopes I have for the future that, you know, technology
[Amit Varma]: in strange and unexpected ways continues to empower individuals.
[Amit Varma]: Who knows, I mean, that could progress liberalism far more than everything else, right?
[Guest]: Gandhi's opposition to so-called technology and modernity was not because of technology
[Guest]: as such.
[Guest]: It was because the technology was enabling to erase the line that he wanted to hold.
[Amit Varma]: That imperialism followed on the heels of liberalism and the technological expansion.
[Amit Varma]: Bhai, modern medicine mein kya line ho raha hai?
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: Modern medicine is secondary.
[Guest]: That's what, this is not a specific thing.
[Guest]: Specific is that he was a person who experimented with all kinds.
[Guest]: And I recently heard an episode on Tagore, where exactly the same thing.
[Guest]: He was experimenting with his diet as a fad, as everybody told him, a new guy told him
[Guest]: something.
[Guest]: He was experimenting.
[Guest]: He's free to do that.
[Guest]: That's not the point at all.
[Guest]: The point is, he was a man who was capable of shifting, being a true believer, a genuine
[Guest]: believer who prayed twice a day at least, shifting from God is truth to truth is God.
[Guest]: I can't think of a more powerful statement than his commitment to science and his progress
[Guest]: and to everything else.
[Guest]: Because by that statement, in my view, he was trying to hold the line.
[Guest]: And we have failed to hold the line, which is why technology is coming to consume us.
[Amit Varma]: We may have failed to hold the line, but, Barun, I believe that we are also capable
[Amit Varma]: of shifting from this recording studio to a restaurant where we shall have a hearty
[Amit Varma]: and wholesome lunch right now.
[Amit Varma]: So I need to thank you profusely once again.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for your time and your insights.
[Amit Varma]: And for talking to me because every time I speak to you, even when I disagree, as I did
[Amit Varma]: so many times today, I feel that you've given me so much to think about.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm looking at it.
[Guest]: What will I take back so that I can take the next step tomorrow?
[Guest]: Thanks a lot.
[Guest]: It's always a pleasure chatting with you and the most undistinguished guest you have ever
[Amit Varma]: had.
[Amit Varma]: Are you kidding me?
[Amit Varma]: Listeners, kindly tag him and tell him he's not the most undistinguished guest.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, you can follow Barun on Twitter, even though
[Amit Varma]: he isn't very active there because he's out on the ground, but you can follow him on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: at Barun S Mitra.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.